The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tale of Triona, by William J. Locke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Tale of Triona

Author: William J. Locke

Release Date: August 18, 2019 [EBook #60122]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF TRIONA ***




Produced by Marcia Brooks, Al Haines, Jen Haines & the
online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net










                          [Cover Illustration]




                           THE TALE OF TRIONA




                         =_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_=
IDOLS
JAFFERY
VIVIETTE
SEPTIMUS
DERELICTS
THE USURPER
STELLA MARIS
WHERE LOVE IS
THE ROUGH ROAD
THE MOUNTEBANK
THE RED PLANET
THE WHITE DOVE
FAR-AWAY STORIES
SIMON THE JESTER
A STUDY IN SHADOWS
A CHRISTMAS MYSTERY
THE WONDERFUL YEAR
THE HOUSE OF BALTAZAR
THE FORTUNATE YOUTH
THE BELOVÈD VAGABOND
AT THE GATE OF SAMARIA
THE GLORY OF CLEMENTINA
THE MORALS OF MARCUS ORDEYNE
THE DEMAGOGUE AND LADY PHAYRE
THE JOYOUS ADVENTURES OF ARISTIDE PUJOL




                           THE TALE OF TRIONA


                                   BY
                            WILLIAM J. LOCKE

            Author of “The Belovèd Vagabond,” “The Morals of
                         Marcus Ordeyne,” etc.


                             [Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                         DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
                                  1922




                            Copyright, 1922
                    By DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, Inc.
                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                           THE TALE OF TRIONA




                           THE TALE OF TRIONA


                               CHAPTER I

OLIVIA GALE leaned back in her chair at the end of the dining-room
table, and looked first at the elderly gentleman on her right, and then
at the elderly gentleman on her left.

“You’re both of you as kind as can be, and I’m more than grateful for
all you’ve done; but I do wish you’d see that it’s no use arguing. It
only hurts and makes us tired. Do help yourself, Mr. Trivett.
And—another cup of tea, Mr. Fenmarch?”

Mr. Fenmarch, on her left, passed his cup with a sigh. He was a dusty,
greyish man, his face covered with an indeterminate growth of thin short
hair. His eyes were of a dull, unspeculative blue.

“As your solicitor, my dear Olivia,” said he, “I can only obey
instructions. As the friend of your family, I venture to give you
advice.”

“Why the deuce your father didn’t tie you up in a trusteeship till you
were twenty-five, at any rate,” said Mr. Trivett on her right, helping
himself to whisky and soda—the table, covered with a green baize cloth,
was littered with papers and afternoon refreshments. “Why the
dickens——” he began again after a sizzling gulp.

“Yes, it’s most unfortunate,” said Mr. Fenmarch, cutting off his
friend’s period. “And what you are going to do with yourself, all alone
in the world, with this enormous amount of liquid money is more than I
can imagine.”

Olivia smiled and tapped the blue-veined hand that set down his teacup.

“Of course you can’t. If imagination ran away with a solicitor, it would
land him in the workhouse.”

“That’s where it will land you, Olivia,” said Mr. Trivett. “Common sense
is the better mount.”

“That’s rather neat,” she said.

“If it wasn’t, I wouldn’t have said it,” retorted Mr. Trivett, sinking
his red jowls into his collar, which made them redder than before.

“You’re so quick and clever,” said Olivia, “that I can’t understand why
you won’t see things from my point of view.”

“You’ve got to learn that a man of experience can’t take the view of a
wrong-headed young woman.”

Mr. Trivett emphasized the asperity of his tone by a thump of his palm
on the table.

As a matter of fact, he was genuinely angry. He was the senior partner
in Trivett and Gale, Auctioneers and Estate Agents, in the comfortable
little Shropshire town of Medlow; or rather the only surviving partner,
for Gale, Olivia’s father, and his two sons had one after the other been
wiped out in a recent world accident. Olivia’s decision, inspired from
no other fount he could think of than lunacy, involved the withdrawal of
considerable capital from the business. This, of course, being an
honourable man, he could not dispute; but here were peace and
reconstruction and inflated prices, and heaven knew how much percentage
on the middleman’s capital, and here was this inexperienced girl
throwing away a safe income and clamouring for a settlement in full.
They had argued and argued. It may be stated here that Mr. Trivett was
the Executor of her father’s estate, which made his position the more
delicate and exasperating.

And now Mr. Trivett’s exasperation reached the table-thumping point.

Olivia smiled wearily.

“It’s such a pity.”

“What’s a pity?”

“Oh, everything. One thing is that there’s no more gold. Of course, I
know you can’t understand. But that’s your fault, not mine. I should
have liked to realize all that I’ve got in sovereigns. Do you think
they’d fill a bath? Have you ever thought how lovely it would be to
wallow in a bath of sovereigns? Treasury notes are not the same thing.
They’re either very dirty and smell of plumbers, or very new and smell
of rancid oil. Gold is the real basis of Romance.”

He put her down for a mere female fool, and replied practically:

“We’ll not see a gold coin in England again for the next fifty years.”

“Well, well,” she said; “anyhow, there’s still some romance in mounting
the deadly breech of the bank counter with a drawn cheque in one’s
hand.”

“I’m afraid, my dear Olivia,” said Mr. Fenmarch mildly, “I don’t quite
see what we’re talking about.”

“Why, we’ve discussed it every day for the last three months,” cried
Olivia, “and now this is the very last end of everything. A final
settlement, as you call it! That’s what you two dears have come for,
isn’t it?”

“Unfortunately, yes,” said Mr. Fenmarch.

“Then it’s all so simple. You’ve shown me this”—she picked up a
foolscap document and dropped it—“the full statement of account of my
father’s estate, and I approve—I being the only person concerned.
You’ve got to give me one last cheque for that amount”—she tapped the
document—“and I give you my receipt, signed over a penny stamp—you’ll
have to stand me a penny stamp, for I’ve only got three-halfpenny ones
in the house—and there’s an end of the matter.”

“My clerk made out the receipt and put the penny stamp on,” said Mr.
Fenmarch, untroubled by her smile. “Here it is.”

“Solicitors’ clerks seem to think of everything,” said Olivia. “Fancy
his remembering the penny stamp!”

“It’s charged up against you, in Fenmarch’s bill—item ‘sundries,’”
remarked Mr. Trivett, pointing a fat forefinger.

“Why, naturally. Why should Mr. Fenmarch shower pennies on me? It’s the
delicate thoughtfulness that I admire. I hope you’ll raise that young
man’s salary.”

Mr. Fenmarch looked pained, like a horse to whom one had offered wooden
oats, and swung his head away. Mr. Trivett opened his mouth to speak,
but before he spoke finished his whisky and soda.

“My dear Olivia,” said he, “I’m sorry to see you so flippant. You’ve
disappointed me and Mrs. Trivett who’ve known you since you were born,
more than I can say. Until your poor mother died—God bless her—we
thought you the most capable, level-headed young woman in this town. But
for the last three months—you’ll forgive my freedom in saying so—you
have shown yourself to be quite impossible.”

He paused, angry. Olivia smiled and drummed on the table.

“Have some more whisky.”

“No, I won’t,” he said in a loud voice. “Whisky’s too expensive to ladle
out in that offhand fashion. It’s a luxury, as you’ll jolly well soon
discover. I’m talking for your good, Olivia. That’s why Fenmarch and I
are here. Two minutes will wind up the business. But we have your
interests at heart, my girl, and we want to make a last appeal.”

She covered with hers the back of his red-glazed hand and spoke in a
softened voice:—

“Yes, I know, I know. I’ve said already that you and Mr. Fenmarch were
dears. But what would you have me do? I’m twenty-three. Alone in the
world.”

“You have your uncle and aunt at Clapham,” said Mr. Trivett.

“I’ve also some sort of relations in the monkey cage at the Zoo,” said
Olivia.

The repartee to the effect that it was the fittest home for her only
occurring to Mr. Trivett when he was getting into bed that night, he
merely stared at her gaspingly. She continued:

“I’m absolutely alone in the world. Do you think it reasonable for me to
stay in this dull old house, in this mouldering old town, where one
never sees a man from one year’s end to another, living for the rest of
my life on the few hundreds a year which I could get if my capital were
properly invested?”

“We don’t grant your premises, Olivia,” said Mr. Fenmarch. “‘The Towers’
may be old, but it is not dull. Medlow is not mouldering, but singularly
progressive, and the place seems to—to pullulate with young men. So I
think our advice to you is eminently reasonable.”

“Oh, dear!” sighed Olivia. “That’s where all the trouble comes in. Our
ideas of dullness, mouldering and pullu—what you call it; don’t
correspond. Mother was very fond of a story of Sydney Smith. Perhaps she
told you. He was walking one day with a friend through the slums and
came across two women quarrelling across the street, through opposite
windows. And Sydney Smith said: ‘They’ll never come to an agreement,
because they are arguing from different premises.’”

There was a silence.

“I’ll have a drop more whisky,” said Mr. Trivett.

“I think I see the point of the remark,” said Mr. Fenmarch greyly. “It
was a play on the two meanings of the word.”

“That was what my mother gave me to understand,” said Olivia.

Then, after another spell of chill silence, she cried, her nerves on
edge:

“Do let us come to the end of it!”

“We will,” said Mr. Trivett impressively. “But not before I’ve made a
few remarks in protest, with Fenmarch as witness. I’m sorry there’s not
another witness——”

“Oh, I’ll get one!” cried Olivia. “Myra—the faithful Myra.”

“Myra’s a servant, also a fool; and you’ve got her under your thumb,”
said Mr. Trivett.

“Well, well,” said Olivia, “we’ll give Myra a miss. But I know what
you’re going to say—and the kind heart that makes you say it.”

A touch of real tenderness crept into her fine dark eyes and almost
softened Mr. Trivett. She looked so young, so slender, so immature in
her simple mourning. Her soft black hair clustered over her forehead in
a manner which he felt was inconsistent with a woman fighting her way
alone in the world. She hadn’t a bit of colour in her cheeks; wanted
feeding up, he thought. She was capable enough in her own sphere, the
management of her house, the care of a bed-ridden mother, the
appreciation of legal technicalities. Until she had got this bee in her
bonnet he had admired her prodigiously; though, with the reserve which
every Englishman makes in his admiration, he deplored the shrewdness of
her tongue. But this idea of hers, to realize all her money in hard cash
at the bank and go off into unknown perils was preposterous. She was not
fit for it. You could take her by the neck in one hand and by the waist
in another and break her to bits. . . . He was a good, honest man with
fatherly instincts developed by the possession of daughters of his own,
strapping red-cheeked girls, who had stayed soberly at home until the
right young man had come along and carried them off to modest homes of
unimpeachable respectability. So when he met the tenderness in Olivia’s
eyes he mitigated the asperities of his projected discourse and preached
her a very human little sermon. While he spoke, Mr. Fenmarch nodded his
unhumorous head and stroked the straggling grey hairs on his cheek. When
he had ended, Mr. Fenmarch seconded, as it were, the resolution.

Then Olivia thanked them prettily, promised to avoid extravagance, and,
in case of difficulty, to come to them for advice. The final cheque was
passed over, the final receipt signed across the penny stamp provided
with such forethought, and Olivia Gale entered into uncontrolled
possession of her fortune.

The men rose to take their leave. Olivia held the hand of the burly
red-faced man who had been her father’s partner and looked up at him.

“I know, if you could have your way, you would give me a good hiding.”

He laughed grimly. “Not the least doubt of it.” Then he patted her
roughly on the shoulder.

“And you, Mr. Fenmarch?”

He regarded her drearily. “After a long experience in my profession,
Olivia, I have come to one conclusion—clients are a mistake. Good-bye.”

Left alone, Olivia stood for a moment wondering whether, after all, the
dusty lawyer had a jaded sense of humour. Then she turned and caught up
the cheque and sketched a few triumphant dancing steps. Suddenly,
holding it in her hand, she rushed out into the hall, where the men were
putting on their overcoats.

“We’ve forgotten the most important thing, Mr. Trivett. You wrote me
something about an offer for the house.”

“An enquiry—not an offer,” replied Mr. Trivett. “Yes. I forgot to
mention it. A Major somebody. Wait——” He lugged out a fat pocket-book
which he consulted. “That’s it. Major Olifant. Coming down here
to-morrow to look over it. Appointment at twelve, if that suits you.
Unfortunately, I’ve an engagement and can’t show him round. But I’ll
send Perkins, if you like.”

“If the Major wants to eat me, he’ll eat up poor little Mr. Perkins,
too,” said Olivia. “So don’t worry.”

She waited until Myra, the maid, had helped them into their overcoats
and opened the front door. After final leavetakings, they were gone.
Olivia put up her hands, one of them still holding the cheque, on Myra’s
gaunt shoulders and shook her and laughed.

“I’ve beaten them at last. I knew I should. Now you and I are going to
have the devil’s own time.”

“We’ll have, Miss Olivia,” said Myra, withdrawing like a wooden
automaton from the embrace, “the time we’ll be deserving.”

Myra was long, lean, and angular, dressed precisely in parlourmaid’s
black; but the absence of cap on her faultlessly neat iron grey hair and
the black apron suggested a cross between the housekeeper and personal
maid. She shared, with a cook and a vague, print-attired help, the whole
service of the house. The fact of Myra had been one of the earliest
implanted in the consciousness of Olivia’s awakening childhood. Myra was
there, perdurable as father and mother, as Polly, the parrot, whose
“Drat the child” of that morning was the same echo of Myra’s voice, as
it was when, at the age of two, she began to interpret the bird’s
articulate speech. And, as far as she could remember, Myra had always
been the same. Age had not withered her, nor had custom staled her
infinite invariability. She had been withered since the beginning of
time, and she had been as unchanging in aspect and flavour as Olivia’s
lifelong breakfast egg. Myra’s origins were hidden in mystery. A family
legend declared her a foundling. She had come as a girl from Essex,
recommended by a friend, long since dead, of Mrs. Gale. She never spoke
of father, mother, sisters, and brothers; but every year, when she took
her holiday, she was presumed to return to her native county. With that
exception she seemed to have far less of a private life than the
household cat. It never occurred to Olivia that she could possibly lead
an independent existence. Her age was about forty-five.

“They think I’m either mad or immoral,” said Olivia. “Thank God, they’re
not religious, or they’d be holding prayer meetings over me.”

“They might do worse,” replied Myra.

The girl laughed. “So you disapprove, too, do you? Well, you’ll have to
get over it.”

“I’ve got over many things—one more or less don’t matter. And if I were
you, Miss, I wouldn’t stand in this draughty hall.”

“All that I’m thinking of,” said Olivia, in high good humour, “is that,
with you as duenna, I shall look too respectable. No one will believe it
possible for any one except an adventuress.”

“That’s what I gather you’re going to be,” said Myra. If she had put any
sting into her words it would have been a retort. But no one knew what
emotions guided Myra’s speech. With the same tonelessness she would have
proclaimed the house to be on fire, or dinner to be ready, or the day to
be fine.

“Well, if you don’t like the prospect, Myra, you needn’t come,” said
Olivia. “I’ll easily find something fluffy in short skirts and silk
stockings to do for me.”

“We’re wasting gas, Miss,” said Myra, pulling the little chain of the
bye-pass and thereby plunging the hall in darkness.

“Oh, bother you!” cried Olivia, stumbling into the passage and knocking
against the parrot’s cage outside the dining-room door, and Polly
shrieked out:

“Drat the child! Drat the child!”

Before entering the dining-room she aimed a Parthian shot at Myra.

“I suppose you agree with the little beast. Well, the two of you’ll have
to look after each other, and I wish you joy.”

She cleared the dining-room table of the tea things and the whisky and
glasses and the superfluous papers, and opened the window to let out the
smell of Mr. Trivett’s strong cigar, and crossed the passage to the
drawing-room opposite, where a small fire was still burning. And there,
in spite of the exultation of her triumph over Mr. Trivett and Mr.
Fenmarch, she suddenly felt very dreadfully alone; also just a whit
frightened. The precious cheque, symbol of independence, which she had
taken up, laid down, taken up again, during her little household duties,
fell to the ground as she lay in the arm-chair by the fireside.

Was her victory, and all it implied, that of a reasonable being and a
decent girl, or that of a little fool and a hussy?

Perhaps the mother whom she worshipped and to whom she had devotedly
sacrificed the last four years of her young life was the inspiration of
her revolt. For her mother had been a highly bred woman, of a proud old
Anglo-Indian family, all Generals and Colonels and Sirs and Ladies,
whose names had been involved in the history of British India for
generations; and when she threw the Anglo-Indian family halo over the
windmills and married young Stephen Gale, who used to stand in the
market-place of Medlow and bawl out the bidding for pigs and sheep, the
family turned her down with the Anglo-Indian thoroughness that had
compelled her mother to lose her life in a plague-stricken district and
her father to lose his on the North-West Frontier. The family argument
was simple. When you—or everything mattering that means you—have ruled
provinces and commanded armies and been Sahibs from the beginning of
Anglo-Indian time, you can’t go and marry a man who sells pigs at
auction, and remain alive. None of the family deigned to gauge the
personal value of the pig-seller. The Anglo-Brahmin lost caste. It is
true that, afterwards, patronizing efforts were made by Brahminical
uncles and aunts and cousins to bridge over the impassable gulf; but
Mrs. Gale, very much in love with her pig-selling husband, snapped her
fingers at them and told them, in individually opposite terms, to go
hang.

It was a love match right enough. And a love match it remained to the
very end of all things; after she had borne him two sons and a daughter;
all through the young lives of the children; up to the day when the
telegram came announcing the death of their elder son—the younger had
been killed in the curious world accident a month or so before—and
Stephen Gale stood by her bedside—she had even then succumbed to her
incurable malady—and said, shaken with an emotion to which one does not
refer nowadays:

“Mary, my dear, what am I to do?”

And she, the blood in her speaking—the blood that had given itself at
Agra, Lucknow, Khandahar, Chitral—replied:

“Go, dear.”

Olivia, sitting by, gripped her young hands in mingled horror and grief
and passionate wonder. And Stephen Gale, just fifty, went out to avenge
his sons and do what was right in his wife’s eyes—for his wife was his
country incarnate, her voice, being England’s voice. A love match it was
and a love match it remained while he stuck it for two or three
years—an elderly man at an inglorious Base, until he died of
pneumonia—over there.

Mrs. Gale had lingered for a year, and, close as their relations had
been all Olivia’s life, they grew infinitely closer during this period
of bereavement. It was only then that the mother gave delicate
expression to the nostalgia of half a lifetime, the longing for her own
kind, and the ways and thoughts and imponderable principles of her own
caste. And, imperceptibly, Olivia’s eyes were opened to the essential
differences between her mother and the social circle into which she had
married. Olivia, ever since her shrewd child’s mind began to appreciate
values, knew perfectly well that the Trivetts and the Gales were not
accounted as gentlefolk in the town. She early became aware of the
socially divided line across which she could not pass so as to enter
Blair Park, the high-class girls’ school on the hill, but narrowed her
to Landsdowne House, where the daughters of the tradespeople received
their education. And when the two crocodiles happened to pass each other
on country walks she hated the smug, stuckup Blair Park girls with their
pretty blue and white ribbons round their straw hats, and hated her red
ribbon with “LH” embroidered on it, as a badge of servitude. When she
grew up she accepted countless other social facts as immutable
conditions of existence. Mortals were divided by her unquestioning
father into three categories—“the swells,” “homely folk like
ourselves,” and “common people.” So long as each member of the three
sections knew his place and respected it, the world was as comfortable a
planet as sentient being could desire. That was one factor in his
worship of his wife: she had stepped from her higher plane to his and
had loyally, unmurmuringly identified herself with it. He had never a
notion, good man, of the shocks, the inner wounds, the instinctive
revolts, the longings that she hid behind her loving eyes. Nor had
Olivia; although as a schoolgirl she knew and felt proud that her mother
really belonged to Blair Park and not to Landsdowne House. As she grew
up, she realized her mother’s refining influence, and, as far as young
blood would allow, used her as a model of speech and manner. And during
the long invalid years, when she read aloud and discussed a wide range
of literature, she received unconsciously a sensitive education. But it
was only in this last poignant intimacy, when they were left starkly
alone together, that she sounded the depths of the loyal, loving, and
yet strangely suffering woman.

“I remember once, long ago, when you were a mite of five,” Mrs. Gale had
said in a memorable confidence, “we were staying at a hotel in
Eastbourne, and I got into conversation on the verandah with a Colonel
somebody—I forget his name—with whom we had spoken several times
before—one of those spare brown, blue-eyed men, all leather and taut
string, that wear their clothes like uniform. You see, I was born and
bred among them, dear. And we talked and we talked and I didn’t know how
the time flew, and I missed an appointment with your father in the town.
And he came and found us together—and he was very angry. It was the
only time in our lives he said an unkind word to me. It was the only
time I gave him any sort of cause for jealousy. But he really hadn’t. It
was only just the joy of talking to a gentleman again. And I couldn’t
tell him. It would have broken his dear heart.”

This was the first flashlight across her mother’s soul, and in its
illumination vanished many obscure and haunting perplexities of her
girlhood. Had Mrs. Gale lived the normal life of women, surrounded by
those that loved her, she would doubtless have gone to her grave without
revealing her inner self to living mortal. But infinite sorrow and the
weakness engendered by constant physical pain had transformed her into a
spirituality just breathing the breath of life and regarding her
daughter less as a woman than as a kindred essence from whom no secrets
could be hid. At her bedside Olivia thus learned the mystery of birth
and life and death. Chiefly the mystery of life, which appealed more to
her ardent maidenhood.

So when at last her mother faded out of existence and Olivia’s vigil was
over, she faced a world of changing values with a new set of values of
her own. She could not formulate them; but she was acutely conscious
that they were different from those of the good, honest Mr. Trivett and
the dull and honourable Mr. Fenmarch, and that to all the social circle
which these two represented they would be unintelligible. In a way, she
found herself possessed of a new calculus in which she trusted to solve
the problems which defied the simple arithmetic of the homely folk of
Medlow.

                 *        *        *        *        *

All these memories and vague certainties passed through the girl’s mind
as she sat before the fire in self-examination after her victory, and
conflicted with the prosaic and indicatively common-sense arguments of
her late advisers. She knew that father and brothers, all beloved and
revered, would have been staunchly on the side of the Trivetts. On the
other hand, her mother, as she had said to her husband on the edge of a
far, far greater adventure, would have said: “Go, dear.” Of that she had
no doubt. . . . Yet it meant cutting herself adrift from Medlow and all
its ways and all its associations. It meant a definite struggle to raise
herself from her father’s second social category to the first. It meant,
therefore, justifying herself against odious insinuations on the part of
her scant acquaintance.

And then the youth in her rose insistent. During all these years of
stress and fever which had marked her development from child into woman
she had done nothing but remain immured within the walls familiar from
her babyhood. Other girls had gone afar, in strange independence, to
vivid scenes, to unforgettable adventures, in the service of their
country, in the service of mankind—just as her brothers and father had
gone—and she had stayed there, ineradicable, in that one little tiny
spot. The sick-room, the kitchen, the shops in Old Street, where, in
defiance of Food Controller, she had fought for cream and butter and
eggs and English meat so that her mother could live; the sick-room
again, the simple white and green bedroom which meant to her little more
than the sleep of exhaustion; the sick-room once more, with its pathos
of spiritual love and physical repulsion—such had been the iron
environment of her life. Sorrow after sorrow, and mourning after
mourning had come, and the little gaieties of the “homely folk” of her
father’s definition had gone on without her participation. And her girl
friends of Landsdowne House had either married rising young tradesmen in
distant towns, or had found some further scope for their energies at the
end of the Great Adventure and were far away. In the meanwhile other
homely folk whom she did not know had poured into the town. All kinds of
people seemed to be settling there, anyhow, without rhyme or reason. It
was only when there was not a house to be rented in the neighbourhood
that she understood why.

“You have a comfortable home of your own. Why, on earth, don’t you stay
in it?” Mr. Trivett had asked.

But she had stayed in it, alone, for the three months since her mother’s
death, waiting on the law’s delays; and those three months had been
foretaste enough of the dreary infinite years that would lie before her,
should she remain. She was too young, too full of sap, to face the
blight of sunlessness. She longed for the sights and the sounds and the
freedom of the great world. What she would do when she got into it, she
did not exactly know. Possibly she might meet a fairy prince. If such a
speculation was that of a hussy, why then, she argued, all women are
hussies from birth. As for being a fool for defying advice on the proper
investment of her money—well, perhaps she was not quite such a fool as
Mr. Trivett imagined. If she did not spend her capital, it would be just
as safe lying on deposit at the bank as invested in stocks and shares;
safer, for she had lately had wearisome experience of the depreciation
of securities. She would not be senselessly extravagant; in fact, with
the sanguineness of youth she hoped to be able to live on the interest
on her deposit and the rent of the furnished house. But behind her,
definite, tangible, uninfluenced by Stock Exchange fluctuations, would
be her fortune. And then—a contingency which she did not put before Mr.
Trivett and Mr. Fenmarch, for a woman seldom discloses her main argument
to a male adversary—there might come a glorious moment in some now
unconjecturable adventure when it might be essential for her to draw
cheques for dazzling sums which she could put in her pocket and go over
mysterious hills and far away. She stood on the edge of her dull
tableland and gazed wide-eyed at the rolling Land of Romance veiled by
gold and purple mist. And in that Land, from immemorial time, people
carried their money in bags, into which they dipped their hands, as
occasion required, and cast the unmeaning counters at the feet of
poverty or into the lap of greed.

When she sat down to her solitary supper, she had decided that she was
neither hussy nor fool. She held baffling discourse with Myra, who could
not be enticed into enthusiasm over the immediate future. Teasing Myra
had been her joy from infancy. She sketched their career—that of female
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza—that of knights of old in quest of
glorious adventure. She quoted, mock heroically:

“The ride abroad redressing human wrong.”

“Better redress the young London women which I see the pictures of in
the illustrated papers,” said Myra.

Olivia laughed. “You are a dear old blessing, you know.”

“I’m sure of it,” said Myra, with an expressionless face. “Anyways,
you’re not going to buy one of them things when you get to London.”

“I am,” replied Olivia. “And you’ll have to help me put it on.”

“You can’t help folks put on nothing,” said Myra.

“What do you think you’ll do when you’re really shocked?” asked Olivia.

“I never think what I’ll do,” replied Myra. “It’s waste of time.”

Olivia enjoyed her supper.


                               CHAPTER II

IT was only when she waited the next morning for her possible tenant,
the Major Olifant of whom Mr. Trivett had spoken, and went through the
familiar rooms to see that they were fit for alien inspection, that she
realized the sacrilege which she was about to commit. Every room was
sacred, inhabited by some beloved ghost. The very furniture bore
landmarks of the wear and tear of those that were dead. To say nothing
of the beds on which they had slept, the chairs in which they had sat,
which still seemed to retain the impress of their forms, there persisted
a hundred exquisitely memorable trivialities. The arm of the oak settle
in the hall still showed the ravages of the teeth of Barabbas, the
mongrel bull-terrier pup introduced, fifteen years ago, into the house,
by Charles her elder brother; an animal who, from being cursed by the
whole family for a pestilential cur, wriggled his way, thanks to his
adoration of Charles, into the hearts of them all, and died from old age
and perhaps doggy anxiety a few months after Charles had sailed for
France. In her father’s study, a small room heterogeneously adorned with
hunting crops and car accessories and stuffed trout and a large scale
map of Medlow and neighbourhood and suggestive in no way of a studious
habit, the surface of the knee-hole writing table and the mahogany
mantelpiece were scored with fluted little burns from cigarette-ends, he
having been a careless smoker. There was a legend that the family
cradle, for many years mouldering in an outhouse, bore the same
stigmata. The very bathroom was not free of intimate history. In the
midst of the blue and red stained panes on the lower sash stared one of
plain ground glass—the record of her brother Bobby aged twelve, who,
vowing vengeance against an unsympathetic visiting aunt (soon afterwards
deceased), had the brilliant idea of catapulting her through the closed
window while she was having her bath. And there was her mother’s
room. . . .

She could not let all this pass into vulgar hands. The vague plan of
letting the house furnished, which had hitherto not been unattractive,
now became monstrously definite. She hated the sacrilegious and
intrusive Major Olifant. He would bring down a dowdy wife and a cartload
of children to the profanation of these her household gods. She went in
search of Myra and found her dusting her own prim little bedroom.

“I’m going out. When Major Olifant calls, tell him I’ve changed my mind
and the house is not to let.”

Then she put on hat and coat and went downstairs to take the air of the
sleepy midday High Street. But as she opened the front door she ran into
a man getting out of a two-seater car driven by a chauffeur. He raised
his hat.

“I beg your pardon,” said he, “but is this ‘The Towers’?”

“It is,” she replied. “I suppose you’ve—you’ve come with an order to
view from Messrs. Trivett and Gale.”

“Quite so,” said he pleasantly. “I have an appointment with Miss Gale.”

“I’m Miss Gale,” said Olivia.

She noticed an involuntary twitch of surprise, at once suppressed, pass
over his face.

“And my name’s Olifant. Major Olifant.”

She had pictured quite a different would-be intruder, a red-faced,
obese, and pushing fellow. Instead, she saw a well-bred, spare man of
medium height wearing a stained service Burberry the empty left sleeve
of which was pinned in front; a man in his middle thirties, with crisp
light brown hair, long, broad forehead characterized by curious bumps
over the brows, a very long, straight nose and attractive dark blue eyes
which keenly and smilingly held hers without touch of offence.

“I’ve decided not to let the house,” said Olivia.

The smile vanished from his eyes. “I’m sorry,” said he stiffly. “I was
given to understand——”

“Yes, I know,” she said quickly. Her conscience getting hold of the
missing arm smote her. “Where have you come from?”

“Oxford.”

She gasped. “Why, that’s a hundred miles!”

“Ninety-four.”

“But you must be perishing with cold,” she cried. “Do come in and get
warm, at any rate. Perhaps I can explain. And your man, too.” She
pointed. “Round that way you’ll find a garage. I’ll send the maid.
Please come in, Major Olifant. Oh—but you must!”

She entered the house, leaving him no option but to follow. To divest
himself of his Burberry he made curious writhing movements with his
shoulders, and swerved aside politely when she offered assistance.

“Please don’t worry. I’m all right. I’ve all kinds of little stunts of
my own invention.”

And, as he said it, he got clear and threw the mackintosh on the oak
chest. He rubbed the knuckle of his right hand against the side of his
rough tweed jacket.

“Just five minutes to get warm and I won’t trespass further on your
hospitality.”

She showed him into the drawing-room, thanked goodness there was a showy
wood-fire burning, and went out after Myra.

“I thought the house wasn’t to be let,” said the latter after receiving
many instructions.

“The letting of the house has nothing to do with two cold and hungry men
who have motored here on a raw November morning for hundreds of miles on
false pretences.”

She re-entered the drawing-room with a tray bearing whisky decanter,
siphon, and glass, which she set on a side table.

“I’m alone in the world now, Major Olifant,” she said, “but I’ve lived
nearly all my life with men—my father and two brothers——” She felt
that the explanation was essential. “Please help yourself.”

He met her eyes, which, though defiant, held the menace of tears. He
made the vaguest, most delicate of gestures with his right hand—his
empty sleeve, the air. She moved an assenting head; then swiftly she
grasped the decanter.

“Say when.”

“Just that.”

She squirted the siphon.

“So?”

“Perfect. A thousand thanks.”

He took the glass from her and deferentially awaited her next movement.
Tricksy memory flashed across her mind the picture of the Anglo-Indian
colonel of her mother’s pathetic little confidence. For a moment or two
she stood confused, flushed, self-conscious, suddenly hating herself for
not knowing instinctly what to do. In desperation she cried.

“Oh, please drink it! You must want it awfully.”

He laughed, made a little bow, and drank.

“Now do sit down near the fire. I’m dreadfully sorry,” she continued
when they were settled. “Dreadfully sorry you should have had all this
journey for nothing. As a matter of fact, I wanted to let the house and
only changed my mind an hour ago.”

“You have lived here all your life?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“Please say no more about it,” said he courteously.

She burst at once into explanations. Father, brothers, mother—all the
dear ghosts, at the last moment, had held out their barring hands. He
smiled at her pretty dark-eyed earnestness.

“There are few houses nowadays without ghosts. But there might be a
stranger now and then who would have the tact and understanding to win
their confidence.”

This was at the end of a talk which had lasted she knew not how long.
The little silence which ensued was broken by the shrill clang of the
ormolu clock on the mantelpiece striking one. She sprang to her feet.

“One o’clock. Why, you must be famished. Seven o’clock breakfast at
latest. There’ll be something to eat, whatever it is.”

“But, my dear Miss Gale,” cried Major Olifant, rising in protest, “I
couldn’t dream of it—there must be an hotel——”

“There isn’t,” cried Olivia unveraciously, and vanished.

Major Olifant, too late to open the door for her, retraced his steps and
stood, back to fire, idly evoking, as a man does, the human purposes
that had gone to the making of the room, and he was puzzled. Some
delicate spirit had chosen the old gold curtains which harmonized with
the cushions on the plain upholstered settee and with the early
Chippendale armchairs and with the Chippendale bookcase filled with odds
and ends of good china, old Chelsea, Coalport, a bit or two of Sèvres
and Dresden. Some green chrysanthemums bowed, in dainty raggedness, over
the edge of a fine cut crystal vase. An exquisite water-colour over the
piano attracted his attention. He crossed the room to examine it and
drew a little breath of surprise to read the signature of Bonington—a
thing beyond price. On a table by the French window, which led into a
conservatory and thence into the little garden, stood a box of Persian
lacquer. But there, throwing into confusion the charm of all this, a
great Victorian mirror in a heavy florid gold frame blared like a German
band from over the mantelpiece, and on the opposite wall two huge
companion pictures representing in violent colours scenes of smug
domestic life, also in gold frames, with a slip of wood let in bearing
the legend “Exhibited at the Royal Academy, 1888,” screamed like an
orchestrion.

He was looking round for further evidence of obvious conflict of
individualities, when Myra appeared to take him to get rid of the dust
of the journey. When he returned to the drawing-room he found Olivia.

“I can’t help feeling an inconscionable intruder,” said he.

“My only concern is that I’ll be able to give you something fit to eat.”

He laughed. “The man who has come out of France and Mesopotamia finikin
in his food is a fraud.”

“Still,” she objected, “I don’t want to send you back to Mrs. Olifant
racked with indigestion.”

“Mrs. Olifant?” He wore a look of humorous puzzlement.

“I suppose you have a wife and family?”

“Good heavens, no!” he cried, with an air of horror. “I’m a bachelor.”

She regarded him for a few seconds, as though from an entirely fresh
point of view.

“But what on earth does a bachelor want with a great big house—with ten
bedrooms?”

“Has it got ten bedrooms?”

“I presume Mr. Trivett sent you the particulars: ‘Desirable Residence,
standing in own grounds, three acres. Ten bedrooms, three reception
rooms. Bath H. and C.,’ and so forth?”

“The Bath H. and C. was all I worried about.”

They both laughed. Myra announced luncheon. They went into the
dining-room. By the side of Major Olifant’s plate was a leather case. He
flashed on her a look of enquiry, at which the blood rose into her pale
cheeks.

“I’ve been interviewing your man,” she said rather defiantly. “He
produced that from the pocket of the car.”

“You overwhelm me with your kindness, Miss Gale,” said he. “I should
never have had the courage to ask for it.”

The case contained the one-armed man’s patent combination knife and
fork.

“Courage is such a funny thing,” said Olivia. “A man will walk up to a
machine-gun in action and knock the gunner out with the butt end of a
rifle; but if he’s sitting in a draught in a woman’s drawing-room and
catching his death of cold, he daren’t get up and shut the window. These
are real eggs, although they’re camouflaged in a Chinese scramble. One
faithful hen is still doing her one minute day. The others are on
strike.”

She felt curiously exhilarated on this first actual occasion of
asserting her independence. Only once before had she entertained guests
at her own table, and these were her uncle and aunt from Clapham, the
Edward Gales, who came to her mother’s funeral. They were colourless
suburban folk who were pained by her polite rejection of their proposal
to make her home with them on a paying footing, and reproached her for
extravagance in giving them butter (of which, nevertheless, they ate
greedily) instead of margarine. Her uncle was a pallid pharmaceutical
chemist and lived above the shop, and his wife, a thin-lipped, negative
blonde, had few interests in life outside the Nonconformist Communion
into which she had dragged him. Olivia had seen them only once before,
also at a funeral, that of a younger brother who had died at the age of
three. Her robustious country-loving, horse-loving, dog-loving,
pig-loving father had never got on with his bloodless brother. A staunch
supporter of the Church of England to the extent of renting a pew in the
Parish Church in which, in spite of the best intentions, he had never
found time to sit, he confessedly hated dissent and all its works,
especially those undertaken by Mrs. Edward. His vice of generosity did
not accord with their parsimonious virtues. Once, Olivia remembered, he
had dined with them at Clapham and returned complaining of starvation.
“One kidney between the three of us,” he declared. “And they gave me the
middle gristly bit!” So Olivia felt no call of the blood to Clapham.
And, for all her inherited hospitable impulses, she had been glad when,
having critically picked the funeral baked meats to the last bone, they
had gone off in sorrow over her wicked prodigality and lack of true
Christian feeling. But for their dreary and passing shadows she had
eaten alone—she caught her breath to think of it—ever since her
father’s last leave—shortly before he died at Etaples—eighteen months
ago. Her hostess-ship at the present moment was a bubbling joy. Only her
sense of values restrained her from ordering up a bottle of champagne.
She contented herself with a bottle of old Corton—her father had been a
judge of full red wines, burgundy and port, and had stocked a small but
well-selected cellar, and had taught Olivia what is good that a girl
should know concerning them.

She watched her guest’s first sip, as her father had been wont to watch,
and flushed with pleasure when he paused, as though taken aback,
sniffed, sipped again, and said:

“Either new conditions are making me take all sorts of geese for swans,
or you’re giving me a remarkable wine.”

She burst out radiantly: “How lovely of you to spot it! It’s a Corton,
1887.”

“But forgive me for saying so,” he remarked. “It’s not a wine you should
spill on any casual tramp. Oh, of course,” he protested in anticipation.
“Your politeness will assure me that I’m not a casual tramp. But I am.”

“I owed you something for bringing you on a fool’s errand. Besides, I
wanted to show you what Todger’s could do when it liked!”

“Todger’s is wonderful,” he smiled. “And how you could ever have thought
of leaving Todger’s is more than I can understand.”

“Oh, I’m going to leave it, right enough,” she answered. “What on earth
do you think a girl all by herself wants with a great big house with ten
bedrooms, three reception rooms, bath h. and c., etc., etc.?”

“It’s your home, anyhow.”

“That’s why I don’t like to let it.”

“Then why go away from it? If it is not an impertinent question, what
are you going to do?”

She met his clear blue eyes and laughed.

“I’m going out into the world to seek adventure. There!”

“And I,” said he, “want to get out of the world and never have another
adventure as long as I live. I’ve had more than enough for one
lifetime.”

“But still,” she retorted, conscious of his bearing and vigour and other
conjectured qualities, “you can’t contemplate fossilizing here till the
end of time.”

“That’s what I’m literally thinking of doing,” he replied.

She felt the reaction of bitter disappointment. A man like him had no
right to throw up the sponge. The sudden blankness of her face betrayed
her thoughts. He smiled.

“I said literally, you know. Fossilizing in the literal and practical
sense. Once upon a time I was a geologist. I specialized in certain
fossils.”

“Oh,” gasped Olivia. “I beg your pardon.”

“Very fascinating little fossils,” he went on without reference to her
apology, for which Olivia was grateful. “They’re called foraminifera. Do
you know what they are?” Olivia shook a frankly ignorant head. “They’re
little tiny weeny shells, and the things once inside them belonged to
the protozoa, or first forms of life. They’re one of the starting-points
to the solution of the riddle of existence. I was dragged away from them
to fool about with other kinds of shells, millions of times bigger and
millions of times less important. I’ve got what I think are some new
ideas about them, and other things connected with them—it’s a vast
subject—and so I’m looking for a quiet place where I can carry on my
work.”

“That’s awfully interesting,” said Olivia. “But—forgive me—who pays
you for it?”

“Possibly mankind two hundred years hence,” he laughed. “But, if I stick
it long enough, they may make me a Fellow of the Royal Society when
I’m—say—seventy-three.”

“I wish you’d tell me some more about these forami—funny little things
I’ve never heard of,” said Olivia.

But he answered: “No. If once I began, I would bore you so stiff that
you would curse the hour you allowed me to cross your threshold. There
are other things just as vital as foraminifera. I’ve made my confession,
Miss Gale. Now, won’t you make yours? What are you keen on?”

At the direct question, Olivia passed in review the aims and interests
and pleasures of her past young life, and was abashed to find them a row
of anæmic little phantoms. For years her head had been too full of
duties. She regarded him for a moment or two in dismay, then she laughed
in young defiance.

“I suppose I’m keen on real live human beings. That’s my starting-point
to the solution of the riddle of existence.”

“We’ll see who gets there first,” said he.

When the meal was over, she stood by the door which he held open for her
and hesitated for a moment.

“I wonder whether you would care to look over the house?”

“I should immensely. But—if you’re not going to let it——”

“You’ll be able, at any rate, to tell Mr. Trivett that he had no
business to send you to such an old rabbit warren,” she replied, with
some demureness.

“I’m at your orders,” smiled Olifant.

She played cicerone with her little business-like air of dignity, spoke
in a learned fashion of water supply, flues, and boilers. Olifant looked
wisely at the kitchen range, while Myra stood at impassive attention and
the cook took refuge in the scullery.

“These holes are to put saucepans on, I presume,” said he.

“You’ve hit it exactly,” said Olivia.

They went upstairs. On the threshold of the best bedroom he paused and
cried, in some astonishment: “What an exquisite room!”

“It was my mother’s,” said Olivia. “You can come in. It has a pleasant
view over the garden.”

Then Olifant, who had inspected the study, solved the puzzle of the
drawing-room. There the man and woman had compromised. She had suffered
him to hang his Victorian mirror and his screaming pictures in the midst
of her delicate scheme. But here her taste reigned absolute. It was all
so simple, so exquisite: a few bits of Chippendale and Sheraton, a few
water-colours on the walls, a general impression for curtains and
upholstery of faded rose brocade. On a table by the bed-head stood a
little row of books in an inlaid stand. With the instinct of a bookish
man, Olifant bent over to look at their backs, but first turned to
Olivia.

“May I?”

“Of course.” Then she added, with a vague longing to impress on a
stranger the wonder and beauty of the spirit that had created these
surroundings: “My mother knew them all by heart, I think. Naturally she
used to read other things and I used to read aloud to her—she was
interested in everything till the day of her death—but these books were
part of her life.”

There were: _Marcus Aurelius_, _Lord Herbert of Cherbury_, _The
Imitation of Christ_, _Christina Rossetti_, the almost forgotten early
seventeenth century _Arthur Warwick_ (“_Spare Minutes; or, Resolved
Meditation and Premeditated Resolutions_”), _Crabbe_ . . . a dozen
volumes or so. Olifant picked out one.

“And this, too? The _Pensées de Pascal_?”

“She loved it best,” said Olivia.

“It is strange,” said he. “My father spent most of his life on a
monumental work on Pascal. He was a Professor of Divinity at a Scotch
University, but died long before the monument could be completed. I’ve
got his manuscripts. They’re in an awful mess, and it would take another
lifetime to get them into order. Anyhow, he took good care that I should
remember Pascal as long as I lived.”

“How?”

“He had me christened Blaise.”

“Blaise Olifant,” she repeated critically. She laughed. “He might have
done worse.”

He turned over the pages. “There’s one thing here that my father was
always drumming into me. Yes, here it is. It’s marked in blue pencil.”

“Then it must have been drummed into me, too,” said Olivia.

“‘_On ne consulte que l’oreille, parce qu’on manque de cœur. La règle
est l’honnêteté._´”

“Yes,” she said, with a sigh.

He replaced the book. They went in silence out to the landing. After a
few seconds of embarrassment they turned and descended to the hall.

“I can more than understand, Miss Gale, why you feel you can’t let the
house. But I’m sorry.”

She weakened, foreseeing the house empty and desolate, given over to
dust and mice and ghosts.

“It was the idea of a pack of people, the British Family in all its
self-centredness and selfishness, coming in here that I couldn’t stand,”
she confessed.

“Then is there a chance for me?” he asked, his face brightening. “Look.
I’m open to a bargain. The house is just what I want. I’m not a recluse.
I’m quite human. I should like to have a place where I can put up a man
or so for a week-end, and I’ve a married sister, none too happy, who now
and then might like to find a refuge with me. There’s also a friend,
rather a distinguished fellow, who wants to join me for a few months’
quiet and hard work. So, suppose I give you my promise to hold that room
sacred, to keep it just as it is and allow no one to go into it except a
servant to dust and so forth—what would you say? Not now. Think it over
and write to me at your convenience.”

His sympathy and comprehension had won her over. He was big and kind and
brotherly. Somehow she felt that her mother would have liked him,
accepting him without question as one of her own caste, and would have
smiled on him as High Priest in charge of the Household Gods. She
reflected for a while, then, meeting his eyes:

“You can have the house, Major Olifant,” she said seriously.

He bowed. “I’m sure you will not regret it,” said he. “I ought to remind
you, however,” he added after a pause, “that I may have a stable
companion for a few months. The distinguished fellow I mentioned. I
wonder whether you’ve heard of Alexis Triona.”

“The man who wrote _Through Blood and Snow_?”

“Have you read it?”

“Of course I have,” cried Olivia. “What do you think I do here all day?
Twiddle my thumbs or tell my fortune by cards?”

“I hope you think it’s a great book,” he said, with a smile.

“An amazing book. And you’re going to bring him to live here? What’s he
like?”

“It would take days to tell you.”

“Well, compress it into a sort of emergency ration,” said Olivia.

So he sat by her side on the oak settle, near the anthracite stove in
the hall, and told her what he knew of Alexis Triona.


                              CHAPTER III

WHAT Blaise Olifant told Olivia about his prospective co-inhabitant of
The Towers, and what Rowington, the publisher, and one or two others
knew about him, amounted to the following:

One morning a motor-car, having the second-hand air of a hiring garage
and unoccupied save for the chauffeur, drew up before the door of a
great London publishing house. The chauffeur stepped from his seat,
collected a brown-paper package from the interior, and entered.

“Can I see a member of the firm?”

The clerk in the enquiry office looked surprised. Chauffeurs offering
manuscripts on behalf of their employers were plentiful as blackberries
in September; but chauffeurs demanding an interview with the august
heads of the house were rare as blackberries in March.

“I’m afraid you can’t do that,” he replied civilly. “If you leave it
here, it will be all right. I’ll give you a receipt which you can take
back.”

“I want to explain,” said the chauffeur.

Scores of people weekly expressed the same desire. It was the business
of the clerk to suppress explanations.

“It’s a manuscript to be submitted? Well, you must tell the author——”

“I am the author,” said the chauffeur.

“Oh!” said the clerk, and his subconscious hand pushed the manuscript a
millimetre forward on the polished mahogany counter.

“The circumstances, you see, are exceptional.”

There being something exceptional in the voice and manner of the
chauffeur, the clerk regarded him for the first time as a human being.

“I quite see,” said he; “but the rules of the firm are strict. If you
will leave the manuscript, it will be read. Oh, I give you my word of
honour,” he smiled. “Everything that comes in is read. We have a staff
who do nothing else. Is your name and address on it?” He began to untie
the string.

“The name, but not the address.”

On the slip of paper which the clerk pushed across to him he wrote:

                       Alexis Triona,
                          c/o John Briggs.
                             3 Cherbury Mews,
                                Surrey Gardens, W.

The clerk scribbled an acknowledgment, the chauffeur thrust it into his
pocket, and, driving away, was lost in the traffic of London.

A fortnight afterwards, Alexis Triona, who, together with John Briggs,
as one single and indissoluble chauffeur, inhabited a little room over
the garage in Cherbury Mews, received a letter to the effect that the
publishing house, being interested in the MS. “_Through Blood and
Snow_,” which he had kindly submitted, would be glad if he would call,
with a view to publication. The result was a second visit on the part of
the chauffeur to the great firm. The clerk welcomed him with a bland
smile, and showed him into a comfortably furnished room whose thick
Turkey carpet signified the noiseless mystery of many discreet decades,
and where a benevolent middle-aged man in gold spectacles stood with his
back to the chimney-piece. He advanced with outstretched hand to meet
the author.

“Mr. Triona? I’m glad to meet you. Won’t you sit down?”

He motioned to a chair by the tidy writing table, where he sat and
pulled forward the manuscript, which had been placed there in readiness
for the interview. He said pleasantly:

“Well. Let us get to business at once. We should like to publish your
book.”

The slight quivering of sensitive nostrils alone betrayed the author’s
emotion.

“I’m glad,” he replied. “I think it’s worth publishing.”

Mr. Rowington tapped the MS. in front of him with his forefinger. “Are
these your own personal experiences?”

“They are,” said the chauffeur.

“Excuse my questioning you,” said the publisher. “Not that it would
greatly matter. But one likes to know. We should be inclined to publish
it, either as a work of fiction or a work of fact; but the handling of
it—the method of publicity—would be different. Of course, you see,” he
went on benevolently, “a thing may be absolutely true in essence, like
lots of the brilliant little war stories that have been written the past
few years, but not true in the actual historical sense. Now, your book
would have more value if we could say that it is true in this actual
historical sense, if we could say that it’s an authentic record of
personal experiences.”

“You can say that,” answered Triona quietly.

The publisher leaned back in his chair.

“How a man could have gone through what you have and remained sane
passes understanding.”

For the first time the young man’s set features relaxed into a smile.

“I shouldn’t like to swear that I am sane,” said he.

“I’ve heard ex-prisoners say,” Mr. Rowington remarked, “that six months’
solitary confinement under such conditions”—he patted the
manuscript—“is as much as the human reason can stand.”

“As soon as hunting and killing vermin ceases to be a passionate
interest in life,” said Triona.

They conversed for a while. Stimulated by the publisher’s question,
Triona supplemented details in the book, described his final adventure,
his landing penniless in London, his search for work. At last, said he,
he had found a situation as chauffeur in the garage of a motor-hiring
company. The publisher glanced at the slip pinned to the cover of the
manuscript.

“And John Briggs?”

“A pseudonym. Briggs was my mother’s name. I am English on both sides,
though my great-grandfather’s people were Maltese. My father, however,
was a naturalized Russian. I’ve mentioned it in the book.”

“Quite so,” said the publisher. “I only wanted to get things clear. And
now as to terms. Have you any suggestion?”

Afterwards, Alexis Triona confessed to a wild impulse to ask for a
hundred pounds—outright sale—and to a sudden lack of audacity which
kept him silent. The terms which the publisher proposed, when the
royalty system and the probabilities of such a book’s profits were
explained to him, made him gasp with wonder. And when, in consideration,
said the publisher, of his present impecunious position, he was offered
an advance in respect of royalties exceeding the hundred pounds of his
crazy promptings, his heart thumped until it became an all but
intolerable pain.

“Do you think,” he asked, amazed that his work should have such market
value, “that I could earn my living by writing?”

“Undoubtedly.” The publisher beamed on the new author. “You have the
matter, you have the gift, the style, the humour, the touch. I’m sure I
could place things for you. Indeed, it would be to our common advantage,
pending publication. Only, of course, you mustn’t use any of the matter
in the book. You quite understand?”

Alexis Triona understood. He went away dancing on air. Write? His brain
seethed with ideas. That the written expression of them should open the
gates of Fortune was a new conception. He had put together the glowing,
vivid book impelled by strange, unknown forces. It was, as he had
confidently declared, worth publishing. But the possible reward was
beyond his dreams. And he could see more visions. . . .

So he went back to his garage and drove idle people to dinners and
theatres, and in his scanty leisure wrote strange romances of love and
war in Circassia and Tartary, and, through the agency of the powerful
publishing house, sold them to solid periodicals, until the public mind
became gradually familiarized with his name. It was only when the book
was published, and, justifying the confidence of the great firm, blazed
into popularity, that Triona discarded his livery and all that
appertained to the mythical John Briggs and, arraying himself in the
garb of ordinary citizenship, entered—to use, with a difference, the
famous trope of a departed wit—a lion into the den of London’s Daniels.
For, in their hundreds, they had come to judgment. But knowing very
little of the Imperial Russian Secret Service in Turkestan, or the ways
of the inhabitants of the Ural Mountains, or, at that time, of Bolshevik
horrors in the remote confines of Asia, they tore each other to pieces,
while the lion stepped, with serene modesty, in the midst of them.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was at Oxford, whither the sudden wave of fame had drifted him, that
he met Blaise Olifant, who was living in the house of his sister, the
wife of a brilliant, undomesticated and somewhat dissolute professor of
political economy. The Head of a College, interested in Russia, had
asked him down to dine and sleep. There was a portentous dinner-party
whose conglomerate brain paralyzed the salmon and refroze the imported
lamb. They overwhelmed the guest of honour with their learning. They all
were bent on probing beneath the surface of his thrilling personal
adventures, which he narrated from time to time with attractive modesty.
The episode of his reprieve when standing naked beside the steaming
chaldron in which he was to be boiled alive caused a shuddering silence.
Perhaps it was too realistic for a conventional dinner-party, but he had
discounted its ghastliness by a smiling nonchalance, telling it as
though it had been an amusing misadventure of travel. Very shortly
afterwards Mrs. Head of College broke into a disquisition on the
continuity of Russian literature from Sumakarov to Chekov. Triona, a
profound student of the subject, at last lost interest in the academic
socialist and threw up his hands.

“My dear lady,” said he, “there is a theory in the United States
accounting for the continued sale of _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_. They say
immigrants buy it to familiarize themselves with the negro question.
Russian literature has just as much to do with the Russia of to-day.
It’s as purely archæological as the literature of Ancient Assyria.”

Blaise Olifant, sitting opposite, sympathized with the man of
actualities set down in this polite academy. Once he himself had
regarded it as the ganglion of the Thought of the Universe; but having
recently seen something of the said Universe he had modified his view.
Why should these folk not be content with a plain human story of almost
fantastic adventure, instead of worrying the unhappy Soldier of Fortune
with sociological and metaphysical theories with which he had little
time to concern himself? Why embroil him in a discussion on the League
of Nations’ duty to Lithuania when he was anxious to give them
interesting pictures of Kurdish family life? He looked round the table
somewhat amusedly at the elderly intellectuals of both sexes, and,
forgetting for a moment the intellectual years of quiet biological
research to which he was about to devote his life, drew an unflattering
contrast between the theorists and their alien guest.

He liked the man. He liked the boyish, clean-shaven face, the broad
forehead marked by very thin horizontal lines, the thin brown hair,
parted carelessly at the side, and left to do what it liked; the dark
grey eyes that sometimes seemed so calm beneath the heavy lids, and yet
were capable of sudden illumination; the pleasant, humorous mouth, and
the grotesque dimple of a hole in the middle of a long chin. He pitied
the man. He pitied him for the hollows in his temples, for the swift
flash of furtive glances, for the great sinews that stood out in his
lean nervous hands, for the general suggestion of shrunken muscularity
in his figure. A stone, or two, thought he, below his normal weight. He
liked his voice, its soft foreign intonation; he liked his modesty, his
careless air of the slim young man of no account; he liked the courteous
patience of his manner. He understood his little nervous trick of
plucking at his lips.

In the drawing-room after dinner Mrs. Head of College said to him:

“A most interesting man—but I do wish he would look you in the face
when he speaks to you.”

Blaise Olifant suppressed a sigh. These good people were hopeless. They
knew nothing. They did not even recognize the unmistakable brand of the
prisoner who has suffered agony of body and degradation of soul. No man
who has been a tortured slave regains, for years, command of his eyes.
Hundreds of such men had Olifant seen, and the sight of them still made
his heart ache. He explained politely. And with a polite air of
unconvinced assent, the lady received his explanation.

He asked Triona to lunch the next day, and under the warmth of his
kindly sympathy Triona expanded. He spoke of his boyhood in Moscow,
where his father, a naturalized Russian, carried on business as a
stockbroker; of his travels in England and France with his English
mother; of his English tutor; of his promising start in life in a great
Russian motor firm—an experience that guaranteed his livelihood during
his late refuge months in London; of his military service; of his early
war days as a Russian officer; of the twists of circumstance that sent
him into the Imperial Secret Service; of incredible wanderings to the
frontiers of Thibet; of the Revolution; of the murder of father and
mother and the disappearance of his fortune like a wisp of cloud
evaporated by the sun; of many strange and woeful things related in his
book; of his escape through Russia; of his creeping as a stowaway into a
Swedish timber boat; of his torpedoing by a German submarine and his
rescue by a British destroyer; of his landing naked save for shirt and
trousers, sans money, sans papers, sans everything of value save his
English speech; of the Russian Society in London’s benevolent aid; of
the burning desire, an irresistible flame, to set down on paper all that
he had gone through; of the intense nights spent over the book in his
tiny ramshackle room over the garage; and, lastly, of the astounding
luck that had been dealt him by the capricious Wheel of Fortune.

In the presence of a sympathetic audience he threw aside the previous
evening’s cloak of modest impersonality. He talked with a vivid
picturesqueness that held Olifant spellbound. The furtive look in his
eyes disappeared. They gleamed like compelling stars. His face lost its
ruggedness, transfigured by the born narrator’s inspiration. Olifant’s
sister, Mrs. Woolcombe, a gentle and unassuming woman on whom the
learning of Oxford had weighed as heavily as the abominable conduct of
her husband, listened with the rapt attention of a modern Desdemona. She
gazed at him open eyed, half stupefied as she had gazed lately at a
great cinematograph film which had held all London breathless.

When he had gone she turned to her brother, still under the spell.

“The boy’s a magician.”

Blaise Olifant smiled. “The boy’s a man,” said he.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Chance threw them together a while later in London. There they met
frequently, became friends. The quiet sincerity of the soldier-scholar
that was Blaise Olifant seemed to strike some chord of soothing in the
heart of the young magician. Fundamentally ignorant of every geological
fact, Triona brought to Olifant’s banquet of fossil solvents of the
mystery of existence an insatiable appetite for knowledge. He listened
to reluctant lectures on elementary phenomena such as ammonites, with
the same rapt attention as Olifant listened to his tales of the old
Empire of Prester John. The Freemasonry of war, with its common
experiences of peril and mutilation—once Triona slipped off pump and
sock and showed a foot from which three toes had been shot away and an
ankle seared with the fester of fetters—formed a primary bond of
brotherhood. By the Freemasonry of intellect they found themselves
members of a Higher Chapter.

“London is wonderful,” said Triona one day. “London’s appreciation of
the poor thing I have done is enough to turn anyone’s head. But while my
head is being turned, in the most delightful way in the world, I can’t
find time to do any work. And I must write in order to live. Do you know
a little quiet spot where I could stay for the winter and write this
precious novel of mine?”

Blaise Olifant reflected for a moment.

“I myself am looking for a sort of hermitage. In fact, I’ve heard of one
in Shropshire which I’m going to look at next week. I want a biggish
house,” he explained, with a smile—“I’ve had enough of dug-outs and
billets in a farmhouse with a hole through the roof to last me my
natural life. So there would be room for a guest. If you would care to
come and stay with me, wherever I pitch my comfortable tent, and carry
on your job while I carry on mine, you would be more than welcome.”

“My dear fellow,” cried Triona, impulsively thrusting out both hands to
be shaken, “this is unheard-of generosity. It means my soul’s salvation.
Only the horrible dread of loneliness—you know the old solitary
prisoner’s dread—has kept me from running down to some little
out-of-the-way place—say in Cornwall. I’ve shrunk from it. But London
is different. In my chauffeur’s days it was different. I had always
associates, fares, the multitudinous sights and sounds of the vast city.
But solitude in a village! Frankly, I funked it. I’ve lived so much
alone that now I must talk. If I didn’t talk I should go mad. Or rather
I must feel that I can talk if I want to. I keep hold of myself,
however. If I bored you with my loquacity you wouldn’t have made me your
delightful proposal.”

“Well, you’ll come, if I can get the right kind of house?”

“With all the gratitude in life,” cried Triona, his eyes sparkling. “But
not as your guest. Some daily, weekly, monthly arrangement, so that we
shall both be free—you to kick me out—I to go——”

“Just as you like,” laughed Olifant. “I only should be pleased to have
your company.”

“And God knows,” cried Triona, “what yours would be to me.”


                               CHAPTER IV

JOHN FREKE was one of the most highly respected men in Medlow. A great
leader in municipal affairs, he had twice been Mayor of the town and was
Chairman of the local hospital, President of clubs and associations
innumerable, and held Provincial Masonic rank. But as John Freke
persisted in walking about the draper’s shop in Old Street, established
by his grandfather, his family consorted, not with the gentry of the
neighbourhood, but with the “homely folk” such as the Trivetts and the
Gales. His daughter, Lydia, and Olivia had been friends in the far-off
days, although Lydia was five years older. She was tall and creamy and
massive and capable, and had a rich contralto voice; and Olivia, very
young and eager, had, for a brief period, sat adoring at her feet. Then
Lydia had married a young officer of Territorials who had been billeted
on her father, and Olivia had seen her no more. As a young war-wife she
pursued all kinds of interesting avocations remote from Medlow, and, as
a young war-widow, had set up a hat shop in Maddox Street. Rumour had it
that she prospered. The best of relations apparently existed between
herself and old John Freke, who put up the capital for her venture, and
desultory correspondence had kept her in touch with Olivia. The fine
frenzy of girlish worship had been cured long ago by Lydia’s cruel lack
of confidence during her courtship. The announcement of the engagement
had been a shock; the engagement itself a revelation of selfish
preoccupation. A plain young sister had been sole bridesmaid at the
wedding, and the only sign of Lydia’s life during the honeymoon had been
a picture postcard on the correspondence space of which was scrawled
“This is a heavenly place. Lydia Dawlish.” Then had followed the years
of sorrow and stress, during which Olivia’s hurt at the other’s
gracelessness had passed, like a childish thing, away.

Lydia’s succeeding letters, mainly of condolence, had, however, kept
unbroken the fragile thread of friendship. The last, especially, written
after Mrs. Gale’s death, gave evidence of sincere feeling, and
emboldened Olivia, who knew no other mortal soul in London—the real
London, which did not embrace the Clapham aunt and uncle—to seek her
practical advice. In the voluminous response she recognized the old
capable Lydia. Letter followed letter until, with Mr. Trivett’s
professional assistance, she found herself the lucky tenant of a little
suite in a set of service flats in Victoria Street.

                 *        *        *        *        *

She entered into possession a fortnight after her interview with Blaise
Olifant, who was to take up residence at “The Towers” the following day.
Mr. Trivett and his wife, Mr. Fenmarch and Mr. Freke, and the elder Miss
Freke, who kept house for her father, saw her off at the station,
covering her with their protective wings to the last moment. Each
elderly gentleman drew her aside, and, with wagging of benevolent head,
offered help in time of trouble. They all seemed to think she was making
for disaster.

But their solicitude touched her deeply. The lump that had arisen in her
throat when she had passed out across the threshold of her old home
swelled uncomfortably, and, when the train moved off and she responded
to waving hands and hats on the platform, tears stood in her eyes.
Presently she recovered.

“Why should things so dear be so dismal?”

Myra, exhibiting no symptoms of exhilaration, did not reply. As they
approached London, Olivia’s spirits rose. At last the dream of the past
weeks was about to be realized. When she stepped out of the train at
Paddington, it was with the throb of the conqueror setting foot, for the
first time on coveted territory. She devoured with her eyes, through the
taxi windows, the shops and sights and the movement of the great
thoroughfares through which they passed on their way to Victoria
Mansions, where her fifth-floor eyrie was situated. Once there, Myra,
accustomed to the spacious family house, sniffed at the exiguous
accommodation and sarcastically remarked that it would have been better
if air were laid on like gas. But Olivia paid little heed to her
immediate surroundings. The cramped flat was but the campaigner’s tent.
Her sphere of action lay limitless beyond the conventional walls. The
walls, however, bounded the sphere of Myra, who had no conception of
glorious adventure. The rapidly ascending lift had caused qualms in an
unaccustomed stomach, and she felt uneasy at living at such a height
above the ground. Why Olivia could not have carried on for indefinite
years in the comfort and security of “The Towers” she was at a loss to
imagine. Why give up the ease of a big house for poky lodgings halfway
up to the sky. A sitting-room, a bedroom, a slip with a bed in it for
herself, a bathroom—Myra thanked goodness both of them were slim—and
that was the London of Olivia’s promise. She sighed. At last put down
Olivia’s aberration to the war. The war, in those days, explained
everything.

Meanwhile Olivia had thrown up the sash of the sitting-room window and
was gazing down at the ceaseless traffic in the street far below—gazing
down on the roofs of the taxis and automobiles which sped like swift
flat beetles, on the dwarfed yet monstrous insects that were the
motor-buses, on the foreshortened dots of the hurrying ant-like swarms
of pedestrians. It was gathering dusk, and already a few lights gleamed
from the masses of buildings across the way. Soon the street lamps
sprang into successive points of illumination. She stood fascinated,
watching the rapid change from December day into December night, until
at last the distant road seemed but a fantastic medley of ever-dying,
ever-recurring sounds and flashes of white and red. Yet it was not
fantastic chaos—her heart leapt at the thought—it was pregnant with
significance. All that rumble and hooting and darting light proclaimed
human purpose and endeavour, mysterious, breath-catching in its unknown
and vast corporate intensity. Shivers of ecstasy ran through her. At
last she herself was a unit in this eager life of London. She would have
her place in the absorbing yet perplexing drama into the midst of which
she had stepped with no key to its meaning. But she would pick up the
threads, learn what had gone before—of that she felt certain—and
then—she laughed—she would play her part with the best of them.
To-morrow she would be scurrying about among them, with her definite
human aims. Why not to-night? Delirious thought! She was free. She could
walk out into the throbbing thoroughfares and who could say her nay? She
put her hand to her bosom and felt the crackle of ten five-pound notes.
To emotional girlhood the feel of money, money not to hoard and make-do
for weeks and weeks with the spectre of want ever in attendance, but
money to fling recklessly about, has its barbaric thrill. Suppose she
let slip from her fingers one of the notes and it swayed and fluttered
down, down, down, until at last it reached the pavement, and suppose a
poor starving girl picked it up and carried it home to her invalid
mother. . . . But, on the other hand, suppose—and her profound and
cynical knowledge of human chances assured her that it would be a
thousand to one probability—supposing it fell on the silk hat of a
corpulent profiteer! No. She was not going to shower promiscuous
five-pound notes over London. But still the crackling wad meant power.
She was free to go forth there and then and purchase all the joys, for
herself and others, hovering over there in that luminous haze over the
Westminster towers of the magical city of dreams.

She withdrew from the window and stood in the dark room, a light in her
eyes, and clenched her hands. Yes. She would go out, now, and walk and
walk, and fill her soul with the wonder of it all.

And then practical memory administered a prosaic jog to her aspiring
spirit. Lydia Dawlish was coming to dine with her in the common
dining-room or restaurant downstairs. Shivering with cold, she shut the
window, turned on the light and sat by the fire, and ordered tea in the
most matter-of-fact way in the world.

Lydia Dawlish appeared a couple of hours afterwards—fair, plump, and
prosperous, attired in one of her own dashing creations of hats set at a
rakish angle on her blond hair, and a vast coat of dark fur. Olivia, in
her simple black semi-evening frock run up by an agitated Medlow
dressmaker, felt a poor little dot of a thing before this regal
personage. And when the guest threw off the coat, the flowered silk
lining of which was a dazing joy to starved feminine eyes, and revealed
the slate-blue dinner gown from which creamy neck and shapely arms
emerged insolent, Olivia could do nothing but stare open-mouthed, until
power came to gasp her wonder and admiration.

“It’s only an old thing,” said Lydia. “I had to put on a compromise
between downstairs and Percy’s.”

“Percy’s?”

“Yes—don’t you know? The night club. I’m going on afterwards.”

Olivia’s face fell. “I thought you were going to spend the evening with
me.”

“Of course I am, silly child. Night clubs don’t begin till eleven. A
man, Sydney Rooke, is calling for me. Well. How are you? And what are
your plans now you’ve got here?”

She radiated health and vigour. Also proclaimed sex defiant, vaguely
disquieting to the country bred girl. Olivia felt suddenly shy.

“It will take me a few days to turn round.”

“Also to find clothes to turn round in,” said Lydia, with a
good-humoured yet comprehensive glance at the funny little black frock.
“I hope you haven’t been laying in a stock of things like that.”

Olivia smiled. This was but a makeshift. She had been saving up for
London. Perhaps Lydia would advise her. She had heard of a good
place—what did they call it?—an enormous shop in Oxford Street. Lydia
threw up her white arms.

“My dear child, you’re not going to be a fashionable beauty at
subscription dances and whist-drives at Upper Tooting! You’re going to
live in London. Good God! You can’t get clothes in Oxford Street.”

“Where shall I get them, then?” asked Olivia.

From the illustrated papers she had become aware of the existence of
Pacotille and Luquin and other mongers of celestial fripperies; but she
had also heard of the Stock Exchange and the Court of St. James’s and
the Stepney Board of Guardians; and they all seemed equally remote from
her sphere of being.

“I’ll take you about with me to-morrow,” Lydia declared grandly, “and
put you in the way of things. I dare say I can find you a hat or two
chez Lydia—that’s me—at cost price.” She laughed and put a patronizing
arm around Olivia’s shoulders. “We’ll make a woman of you yet.”

The lift carried them down to the restaurant floor. They dined, not too
badly, at a side table from which they could view the small crowded
room. Olivia felt disappointed. Only a few people were in evening dress.
It was rather a dowdy assembly, very much like that in the
boarding-house at Llandudno, her father’s summer holiday resort for
years before the war. Her inexperience had expected the glitter and joy
of London. Hospitably she offered wine, champagne, as her father, a
lover of celebrations, would have done; but Lydia drank nothing with her
meals—the only way not to get fat, which she dreaded. Olivia drank
water. The feast seemed tame, and the imported mutton tough. She
reproached herself for inadequate entertainment of her resplendent
friend.

They talked; chiefly Lydia, after she had received Olivia’s report on
her family’s welfare and contemporary Medlow affairs; and Olivia
listened contentedly, absorbing every minute strange esoteric knowledge
of the great London world of which the pulsating centre appeared to be
Lydia, Ltd., in Maddox Street. There Duchesses bought hats which their
Dukes did not pay for. There Cabinet Ministers’ wives, in the hope of
getting on the right financial side of Lydia, whispered confidential
Cabinet secrets, while Ministers wondered how the deuce things got into
the papers. There romantic engagements were brought from inception to
maturity. There also, had she chosen to keep a record, she could have
accumulated enough evidence to bring about the divorces of half the
aristocracy of England. She rattled off the names like a machine-gun.
She impressed Olivia with the fact that Lydia, Ltd., was not a mere hat
shop, but a social institution of which Lydia Dawlish was the creating
and inspiring personality. Lydia, it appeared, weekended at great
houses. “You see, my dear, my husband was the son of an Honourable and
the grandson of an Earl. He hadn’t much money, poor darling, but still
he had the connection, most useful to me nowadays. The family buy their
hats from me, and spread the glad tidings.” She commanded a legion of
men who had vowed that she should live, free of charge, on the fat of
the land, and should travel whithersoever she desired in swift and
luxurious motor-cars.

“Of course, my dear,” she said, “it’s rather a strain. Men will cart
about a stylish, good-looking woman for a certain time, just out of
vanity. But if she’s a dull damn fool, they’re either bored to tears and
chuck her, or they’ll want to—well—well—— Anyhow, you’ve got to keep
your wits about you and amuse them. You’ve got to pay for everything in
this life—or work for the means of paying—which comes to the same
thing. And I work. I don’t say it isn’t pleasant work—but it’s hard
work. You go out with a man to dinner, theatre and a night club, and
dismiss him at your front door at two o’clock in the morning with the
perfectly contented feeling that he has had a perfectly good time and
would be an ass to spoil things by hinting at anything different—and
you’ve jolly well earned your comfortable, innocent night’s rest.”

This explosion of the whole philosophy of modern conscientious woman
came at the end of dinner. Olivia toyed absently with her coffee,
watching successive spoonfuls of tepid light-amber coloured liquid fall
into her cup.

“But—all these men—” she said in a low voice—the position was so
baffling and so disconcerting. “You are a beautiful and clever woman.
Don’t they sometimes want to—to make love to you?”

“They all do. What do you think? I, an unattached widow and, as you say,
not unattractive. But because I’m clever, I head them off. That’s the
whole point of what I’ve been telling you.”

“But, suppose,” replied Olivia, still intent on the yellowish water,
“suppose you fell in love with one of these men. Women do fall in love,
I believe.”

“Why then, I’d marry him the next day,” cried Lydia, with a laugh.
“But,” she added, “that’s not the type of man a sensible woman falls in
love with.”

Olivia’s eyes sought the tablecloth. She was conscious of disturbance
and, at the same time, virginal resentment.

“As far as my limited experience goes—a woman isn’t always sensible.”

“She has to learn sense. That’s the great advantage of modern life. It
gives her every opportunity of acquiring it from the moment she goes out
into the world.”

“And what kind of man does the sensible woman fall in love with?”

“Somebody comfortable,” replied Lydia. “My ideal would be a young,
rather lazy and very broad-minded bishop.”

Olivia shook her head. The only time she had seen a bishop was at her
confirmation. The encounter did not encourage dreams of romance in
episcopal circles.

“But these men who take you out,” Olivia persisted thoughtfully “and do
all these wonderful things for you—it must cost them a dreadful lot of
money—what kind of people are they?”

“All sorts. Some are of the very best—the backbone of the nation. They
go off and marry nice girls who don’t frequent night clubs and settle
down for the rest of their lives.”

They drank their coffee and went upstairs, where questions of more
immediate practical interest occupied their minds. Olivia’s wardrobe was
passed in review, while Myra stood impassive like a sergeant at kit
inspection.

“My poor child,” said Lydia, “you’ve not a single article, inside or
outside, that is fit to wear. I’ll send you a second-hand clothes man
who’ll buy up the whole lot as it stands and give you a good price for
it. I don’t know yet quite what you’re thinking of doing—but at any
rate you can’t do it in these things.”

Olivia looked wistfully at the home-made garments which Lydia cast with
scorn across the bed. They, at least, had seemed quite dainty and
appropriate.

“Well,” she said, with a sigh, “you know best, Lydia.”

These all-important matters held their attention till a quarter past
eleven, when Mr. Sydney Rooke was announced. He was an elderly young man
in evening dress, with crisp black hair parted in the middle and
thinning at the temples. A little military moustache gave him an air of
youth which was belied by deep lines in his sallow face. His dark eyes
were rather tired and his mouth hard. But his manners were perfect. He
gave them both to understand that though Lydia was, naturally, the lady
of his evening’s devotion yet his heart was filled with a sense of
Olivia’s graciousness. Half a dozen words and a bow did it. In a polite
phrase, a bow and a gesture he indicated that if Miss Gale would join
them, his cup of happiness would overflow. Olivia pleaded fatigue. Then
another evening? With Mrs. Dawlish. A pleasant little party, in fact. He
would be enchanted.

“We’ll fix it up for about a fortnight hence,” said Lydia significantly.
“To-morrow, then, dear, at eleven.”

When they had gone Olivia, who had accompanied them to the flat door,
threw herself on the sofa and, putting her hands behind her head stared
over the edge of her own world into a new one, strange and bewildering.

Myra entered.

“Are you ever going to bed?”

“I suppose I must,” said Olivia.

“Are dressed-up men like that often coming here?”

“God knows,” said Olivia, “who are coming here. I don’t.”


                               CHAPTER V

THE Odyssey or the Argonautic, or whatever you like to call the epic of
the first wild adventure of a young woman into the Infinite of Clothes,
has yet to be written. It would need not only a poet, but a master of
psychology, to record the myriad vibrations of the soul as it reacts to
temptations, yieldings, tremulous thrills of the flesh, exquisite
apprehensions, fluttering joys, and each last voluptuous plenitude of
content. It is an adventure which absorbs every faculty of the will;
which ignores hunger and thirst, weariness of limb and ache of head;
which makes the day a dream of reality and the night the reality of a
dream. Hardened women of the world with frock-worn minds are caught at
times by the lure of the adventure, even when it is a question of a
dress or two and a poor half a dozen hats. But how manifold more potent
the spell in the case of one who starts with her young body in
Nymph-like innocence and is called upon to clothe it again and again in
infinite variety, from toe to head, from innermost secret daintiness to
outward splendour of bravery!

Such a record would explain Olivia, not only to the world, but to
herself during that first fortnight in London. Her hours could be
reckoned by gasps of wonder. She lost count of time, of money, of human
values. Things that had never before entered into her philosophy, such
as the subtle shade of silk stockings which would make or mar a costume,
loomed paramount in importance. The after-use scarcely occurred to her.
Sufficient for the day was the chiffon thereof; also the gradual
transformation of herself from the prim slip of a girl with just the
pretension (in her own mind) to good looks, into a radiant and somewhat
distinguished dark-haired little personage.

Her shrinkings, her arguments with Lydia Dawlish, her defeats, went all
into the melting-pot of her delight. “No bath salts, my dear?” cried
Lydia. “Whoever heard of a woman not using bath salts?” So bath salts
were ordered. And—horrified: “My dear, you don’t mean to say you wash
your face in soap and water. What will become of your skin?” So Olivia
was put under the orders of a West End specialist, who stocked her
dressing-table with delectable creams and oils. It was all so new, so
unheard of, so wonderful to the girl, an experience worth the living
through, even though all thousands at deposit at the bank should vanish
at the end of it. Merely to sit in a sensuously furnished room and have
beautiful women parade before her, clad in dreams of loveliness—any one
of which was hers for a scribble on a bit of pink paper—evoked within
her strange and almost spiritual emotions. Medlow was countless leagues
away; this transcended the London even of her most foolish visions.

Afterwards Olivia, when, sense of values being restored she looked back
on this phantasmagoria of dressmakers, milliners, lingerie makers and
furriers, said to Lydia Dawlish:

“It’s funny, but the fact that there might be a man or so in the world
never entered my head.”

And the wise Lydia answered: “You were too busy turning yourself into a
woman.”

Twice or thrice during this chrysalis period she stole out of nights
with Myra to the dress circle of a theatre, where, besides ingenuous joy
in the drama, she found unconfessed consolation in the company of homely
folk like herself—girls in clean blouses or simple little frocks like
her own, and young men either in well-worn khaki or morning dress. On
these occasions she wondered very much what she was about to do in the
other galley—that of the expensively furred and jewelled haughtinesses
and impudences whom she shouldered in the vestibule crush and whom she
saw drive away in luxurious limousines. These flashing personalities
frightened her with their implied suggestions of worlds beyond her ken.
One woman made especial impression on her—a woman tall, serene, with a
clear-cut face, vaguely familiar, and a beautiful voice; she overheard a
commonplace phrase or two addressed to the escorting man. She brushed
Olivia’s arm and turned with a smile and a word of gracious apology and
passed on. Olivia caught a whisper behind her. “That’s the Marchioness
of Aintree. Isn’t she lovely?” But she did not need to be told that she
had been in contact with a great lady. And she went home doubting
exceedingly whether, for all her flourish of social trumpets, Lydia
Dawlish’s galley was that of Lady Aintree.

Criticism of Lydia, however, she put behind her as ingratitude, for
Lydia made up royally for past negligence. Time and energy that ought to
have been devoted to Lydia, Ltd., was diverted to the creation of
Olivia.

“I don’t know why you’re so good to me,” she would say.

And the other, with a little mocking smile round her lips: “It’s worth
it. I’m giving myself a new experience.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

The first occasion on which she went out into the great world was that
of Sydney Rooke’s party. She knew that her low-cut, sleeveless,
short-skirted gown of old gold tissue had material existence, but she
felt herself half-ashamedly, half-deliciously clad in nothing but a
bodily sensation. A faint blush lingered in her cheeks all the evening.
Lydia, calling for her in Rooke’s car, which had been placed at her
disposal, held her at arm’s length in sincere and noble admiration,
moved by the artist’s joy in beholding the finished product of his toil,
and embraced her fondly. Then she surveyed her again, from the little
gold brocade slippers to the diamond butterfly (one of her mother’s bits
of jewellery) in her dark wavy hair.

“You’re the daintiest elf in London,” she cried.

To the dinner at the Savoy Sydney Rooke had invited a white-moustached
soldier, Major-General Wigram, whose blue undress uniform, to the
bedazzlement of Olivia, gleamed with four long rows of multi-coloured
ribbon; a vivacious middle-aged woman, Mrs. Fane Sylvester, who wrote
novels, plays, books of travel, and fashion articles in a weekly
periodical—Olivia learned all this in their first five-minute converse
in the lounge; Sir Paul and Lady Barraclough, he a young baronet whose
civilian evening dress could not proclaim hard-won distinctions, she a
pretty, fair, fragile creature, both of them obviously reacting joyously
to relaxation of tension; and, last, the Vicomte de Mauregard, of the
French Embassy, young, good looking, who spoke polished English with a
faultless accent. It was, socially, as correct a little party as the
brooding, innocent spirit of Mrs. Gale could have desired for her
about-to-be prodigal daughter. Olivia sat between her host and
Mauregard. On her host’s right was Lady Barraclough; then the General,
then Lydia, then Sir Paul, facing Rooke at the round table, then Mrs.
Fane Sylvester, who was Mauregard’s left-hand neighbour. They were by
the terrace windows, far from what Olivia, with her fresh mind playing
on social phenomena, held then and ever afterwards, most rightly, to be
the maddening and human intercourse-destroying band.

Not that her first entrance down the imposing broad staircase, into the
lounge filled with mirifically vestured fellow-creatures, to the
accompaniment of a clashing rag-time imbecility, did not set all her
young nerves vibrating to the point of delicious agony. It was like a
mad fanfare heralding her advent in a new world. But soon she found that
the blare of the idiot music deadened all other senses. Before her eyes
swayed black-and-white things whom at the back of her mind she
recognized as men, and various forms all stark flesh, flashing jewels
and a maze of colours, whom she knew to be women. The gathering group of
her own party seemed but figures of a dream. Her unaccustomed ears could
not catch a word of the conventional gambits of conversation opened, on
introduction, by her fellow guests. It was only when they passed between
the tables of the great restaurant and the horrible noise of the
negroid, syncopated parody of tune grew fainter and fainter, and they
reached the peace of the terrace side, that the maddening clatter faded
from her ears and consciousness of her surroundings returned.

Then she surrendered herself to huge enjoyment. Both her neighbours had
been all over the world and seen all sorts and conditions of men. They
were vividly aware of current events. Pride would not allow her to
betray the fact that often they spoke of matters far beyond her
experience of men and things. Under their stimulus she began to regain
the self that, for the past fortnight, the cardboard boxes of London had
snowed under.

“It’s no use asking me,” she said to Mauregard, “whether I’ve been to
Monte Carlo or Madagascar or Madame Tussaud’s, for I haven’t. I haven’t
been anywhere. I’ve somehow existed at the back of Nowhere, and to-night
I’ve come to life.”

“But where did you come from? The sea foam? Venus Anadyomene?”

“No, I’m of the other kind. I come from far inland. I believe they call
it Shropshire. That oughtn’t to convey anything to you.”

“Indeed it does!” cried Mauregard. “Was I not at school at Shrewsbury?”

“No?”

“But yes. Three years. So I’m Shropshire, too.”

“That’s delightful,” she remarked; “but it does away with my little
mystery of Nowhere.”

“No, no,” he protested, with a laugh. He was a fair, bright-eyed boy
with a little curled-up moustache which gave him the air of a cherub
playfully disguised. “It is the county of mystery. Doesn’t your poet
say:

                    ‘Once in the wind of morning
                      I ranged the thymy wold;
                    The world-wide air was azure
                      And all the brooks ran gold.’”

“That’s from _A Shropshire Lad_,” cried Olivia.

“Of course. So why shouldn’t you have come from the wind of morning, the
azure world-wide air or the golden brook?”

“That’s beautiful of you,” said Olivia. “Well, why shouldn’t I? It’s
more romantic and imaginative than the commonplace old sea. The sea has
been overdone. I used to look at it once a year, and, now I come to
think of it, it always seemed to be self-conscious, trying to live up to
its reputation. But ‘the wind of the morning——’ Anyhow, here I am.”

“Blown to London by the wind of a Shropshire morning.”

Olivia’s spirit danced in the talk. With his national touch on the
lighter emotions, Mauregard drew from her an exposition of the Dryad’s
sensations on sudden confrontation with modern life. To talk well is a
great gift; to compel others to talk well is a greater; and the latter
gift was Mauregard’s. Olivia put food into her mouth, but whether it was
fish or flesh or fowl she knew not. When her host broke the spell by an
announcement in her ear that he had a couple of boxes for “Jazz-Jazz,”
she became aware that she was eating partridge.

Mr. Sydney Rooke talked of women’s clothes, of which he had an expert
knowledge. Lady Barraclough chimed in. Olivia, fresh from the welter,
spoke as one in authority. Now and again she caught Lydia’s eye across
the table and received an approving nod. The elderly General regarded
her with amused admiration. She began to taste the first-fruits of
social success. She drove in a taxi to the theatre with the Barracloughs
and Mrs. Fane Sylvester and sat with them in a box during the first act
of the gay revue. For the second act there was a change of company and
she found herself next to the General. He had served in India and was
familiar with the names of her mother’s people. What Anglo-Indian was
not? Long ago he had met an uncle of hers; dead, poor chap. This social
placing gave her a throb of pleasure, setting her, at least, in a
stranger’s eyes, in her mother’s sphere. The performance over, they
parted great friends.

General Wigram and Mrs. Fane Sylvester excusing themselves from going on
to Percy’s, the others crowded into Sydney Rooke’s limousine. The crash
of jazz music welcomed them. Already a few couples were dancing; others
were flocking in from the theatres. They supped merrily. Sydney Rooke
pointed out to Olivia’s wondering eyes the stars of the theatrical
firmament who condescended to walk the parquet floor of the famous night
club. He also indicated here and there a perfectly attired youth as a
professional dancer.

“On the stage?”

He explained that they had their professional partners and gave
exhibition dances, showing the new steps. They also gave private
lessons. It was the way they made their living. Olivia knitted a
perplexed brow.

“It doesn’t seem a very noble profession for a young man.”

Sydney Rooke shrugged his shoulders politely.

“I’m with you a thousand times, my dear Miss Gale. The parasite, _per
se_, isn’t a noble object. But what would you have? The noble things of
the past few years came to an end a short while ago, and, if I can read
the times, reaction has already begun. In six months’ time the noble
fellow will be a hopeless anachronism.”

“Do you mean,” asked Olivia, “that all the young men will be rotten?”

He smiled. “How direct you are! Disconcerting, if I may say so. So
positive; while I was approaching the matter from the negative side.
There’ll be a universal loss of ideals.”

Olivia protested. “The young man has before him the reconstruction of
the world.”

“Oh no,” said Rooke. “He has done his bit. He expects other people to
carry out the reconstructing business for him. All he cares about is to
find a couple of sixpences to jingle together in his pocket.”

“And have these young men who devote their lives to foxtrotting done
their bit?”

He begged the question. “Pray be guided by my prophecy, Miss Gale. Next
year you mustn’t mention war to ears polite. These young men are alive.
They thank God for it. Let you and me do likewise.”

This little supper-table talk was the only cloud on a radiant night. The
Vicomte de Mauregard took her to dance. At first she felt awkward,
knowing only the simple steps of five years ago. But instinct soon
guided her, and for two hours she danced and danced in an unthinking
ecstasy. The clattering and unmeaning din which had dazed her on her
entrance to the Savoy was now pregnant with physical significance. The
tearing of the strings, the clashing of the cymbals, the barbaric
thumping of the drum, the sudden raucous scream from negro throats, set
vibrating within her responsive chords of an atavistic savagery. When
each nerve-tearing cacophony came to its abrupt end, she joined
breathlessly with the suddenly halting crow in eager clapping for the
encore. And then, when the blood-stirring strings and cymbals crashed
out, overpowering the staccato of hand beating hand, she surrendered
herself with an indrawn sigh of content to her partner’s arm—to the
rhythm, to the movement, to the mere bodily guidance, half conscious of
the proud flexibility of her frame under the man’s firm clasp, to
something, she knew not what, far remote from previous experience.
Strange, too, the personality of the man did not matter. Paul
Barraclough, Sydney Rooke, Mauregard, she danced with them all in turn.
In her pulsating happiness she mixed them all up together, so that a
flashing glance, liable to be misinterpreted, proceeded from a mere
impulse of identification. Now and then, in the swimming throng of men
and women, and the intoxication of passing raiment impregnated with
scent and cigarette smoke, she exchanged an absent smile with Lydia and
Lady Barraclough. Otherwise she scarcely realized their existence. She
was led panting by Mauregard to a supper table while he went in search
of refreshment. He returned with a waiter, apologizing for the
abomination of iced ginger ale and curled orange peel, which was all
that the laws of the land allowed him to offer. Horse’s neck, it was
called. She laughed, delighted with the name, and, after drinking,
laughed again, delighted with the cool liquid so tingling on her palate.

“It’s a drink for the gods,” she declared.

“If you offered it, the unfortunate Bacchus would drink it without a
murmur.”

“Do you really think it’s so awful?”

“_Mon Dieu!_” replied the young Frenchman.

Then Lydia came up with a dark-eyed, good-looking boy in tow, whom she
introduced, as Mr. Bobbie Quinton and Olivia was surprised to recognize
as one of the professionals. She accepted, however, his invitation to
dance and went off on his arm. She found him a boy of charming manners
and agreeable voice, and in the lightness and certainty of his dancing
he far outclassed her other partners. He suggested new steps. She tried
and blundered. She excused herself.

“This is the first time I’ve danced for four years.”

“It doesn’t matter,” said he. “You’re a born dancer. You only need a few
lessons to bring you up to date. What I find in so many of the women I
teach is that they not only don’t begin to understand what they’re
trying to do, but that they never try to understand. You, on the other
hand, have it instinctively. But, of course, you can’t learn steps in a
place like this.”

“I wonder if you could give me some lessons?”

“With all the pleasure in life, Miss Gale,” replied Mr. Bobbie Quinton
promptly.

                 *        *        *        *        *

About two o’clock in the morning Sydney Rooke and Lydia deposited Olivia
at the front door of Victoria Mansions. Rooke stood hat in hand as she
entered.

“I hope you’ve not been too bored by our little evening.”

“Bored! It has been just one heaven after another opening out before
me.”

“But not the seventh. If only I could have provided that!”

“I’ll find it in the happiest and soundest night’s rest I ever had,”
said Olivia.


                               CHAPTER VI

THIS was life; magical, undreamed of in her wildest Medlow dreams. And
thanks to Lydia, she had plunged into it headlong, after a mere
fortnight’s probation. There had been no disillusion. She had plunged
and emerged into her kingdom. London conspired to strew her path with
roses. The Barracloughs invited her to a dinner party at their home in
Kensington. General Wigram offered her dinner and theatre and convened
to meet her an old Indian crony, General Philimore, and his young
daughter, Janet. Philimore had known her grandfather, Bagshawe of the
Guides, when he was a subaltern, infinite ages ago. The world was a
small place, after all. Olivia, caring little for grandfathers beyond
their posthumous social guarantee, found youth’s real sympathy in Janet,
who held open for her their flat in Maida Vale. Young Mauregard, after
their first lunch together at the Carlton, seemed prepared to provide
her with free meals and amusements for the rest of time. It is true he
was madly in love with a Russian dancer, whose eccentric ways and
abominable treatment of him formed the staple of the conversation which
he poured into her very interested and compassionate ear. And, last,
Bobbie Quinton gave her dancing lessons at the flat at the rate of a
guinea apiece.

Christmas caused a break in these social activities. Lydia took her off
to Brighton, where, meeting various acquaintances of her chaperone and
making others of her own, she motored and danced and danced and motored,
and in the pursuit of these delights discovered, with a fearful joy,
that she could hold her own in the immemorial conflict of sex. Sydney
Rooke, having driven down for the day, occasionally flashed through the
hotel, the eternal smile of youth on his dark, lined face and his
gestures unceasingly polite. As he passed, the heavens opened and rained
champagne and boxes of chocolate and hot-house fruits and flowers and
embroidered handbags, and once, a Pekinese dog for Lydia. Once again, an
automobile seemed about to fall, but at Lydia’s protests it melted in
the ether.

“A dog and a rose and a glass of wine,” said she, “are a woman’s due for
amusing a man. But a motor-car is profiteering. Besides, it’s bound to
drive you somewhere in the end—either to the flat of shame or the
country house of married respectability: it only depends on who is at
the wheel.”

“I see,” said Olivia. But she didn’t. Sydney Rooke was a mystery; and
Lydia’s attitude towards him was more than her inexperience could
understand.

Still, there she was in the pleasant galley and she did not question
what she was doing in it. In a dim way she regarded it as the inevitable
rescue vessel after universal shipwreck. Her eyes were blinded by its
glitter and her ears deafened by its music to the welter of the unsalved
world.

Just before New Year she received a letter from Bobby Quinton. It began:
“Dearest of Ladies.” Never before having been thus apostrophized, she
thought it peculiarly graceful and original. The writing was refined and
exquisitely clear. To his dearest of ladies the young man bewailed her
absence; life was dreary without her friendship and encouragement; all
this Christmastide he was the loneliest thing on earth; he suggested
that there was no one to love him—no mother or sisters to whom he could
apply for comfort; this terrible night life to which he, poor
demobilized soldier of fortune, was condemned in order to earn his
bread, weighed upon his spirits and affected his health; he envied his
dearest of ladies’ sojourn by the invigorating sea; he longed for the
taste of it; but such health-restoring rapture he gave her, in the most
delicate way, to understand, was for fairy princesses and not for the
impecunious demobbed; he counted the days till her return and prayed her
to bring back a whiff of ozone on her garments to revive the ever
faithful one who had the temerity to try to teach her to dance.

A most piteous epistle. Bobby Quinton, by his ingratiating ways and his
deference and his wit, had effaced her original conception of the type
of young men who danced at night clubs for their living. She liked him.
He seemed so young and she, through her long companionship with sorrow,
so old in comparison; he seemed so foolish and impossible, and she so
wise; to her, remembering the helpless dependence of her father and
brothers, he seemed (motherless and sisterless as he was) lost in a
hostile world. Besides, he was not a nameless adventurer. His father
(long since deceased) had been a Colonial Governor. He had been to one
of the great public schools. In short, he had the birth and breeding of
a gentleman. She slipped on a dressing-gown and went with the letter to
Lydia, full of maternal purpose.

It was nine o’clock in the morning. Their rooms had a communicating
door. She found Lydia daintily attired in boudoir cap and
dressing-jacket, having breakfast in bed.

“The poor boy’s dying for a breath of sea air. It would do him an
enormous amount of good. Do you think we—of course, it really would be
me—but it would be better if it appeared to be a joint affair—do you
think we could, without offending him, ask him to come down here for a
couple of days as our guest?”

Lydia, who had read the letter with a smile round her lips, replied
drily:

“As far as Bobby is concerned—I really think we could.”

“And as far as we are concerned,” flashed Olivia, “why should the silly
fact of being a woman prevent us from helping a lame dog over a stile?”

“A he-dog,” said Lydia.

“What does it matter?” Olivia asked stoutly.

Lydia laughed in her half-cynical, tolerant way.

“Do as you like, dear. I don’t mind. You’re out for experience, not I.
I’d only have you remark that our he-dog friend Bobby is sitting up and
begging for the invitation——”

“Oh! Ah!” cried Olivia, with a fling of her arm, “you’re horrid!”

“Not a bit,” smiled Lydia. “I face facts, as you’ll have to do, if you
want to find comfort in this matter-of-fact world. Have your Bobby down
by all means. Only keep your eye on him.”

“He’s not my Bobby,” said Olivia indignantly.

“Our Bobby, then,” said Lydia, with good-natured indulgence.

So Olivia, with the little palpitation of the heart attendant on
consciousness of adventurous and (in Medlow eyes, preposterous)
well-doing, wrote to Bobby Quinton a letter whose gracious delicacy
would not have wounded the susceptibilities of a needy Hidalgo or an
impoverished Highland chieftain, and received in reply a telegram of
eager acceptance.

Bobby appeared immaculately vestured, his heart overflowing with
gratitude at the amazing sweetness of his two dear ladies. Never had man
been blessed with such fairy godmothers. By the fresh frankness of his
appreciation of their hospitality he disarmed criticism. A younger son
hanging on to the court of Louis XIII never received purses of gold from
his lady love with less embarrassed grace. He devoted himself to their
service. He had the art of tactful effacement, and of appearance at the
exact moment of welcome. He enlivened their meals with chatter and a
boyish brightness that passed for wit.

To Olivia, the dearest of his dear ladies, he confided the pathetic
history of his life. A sunny, sheltered corner of the Pier, both sitting
side by side well wrapped in furs, conduced to intimacy. How a young man
in such a precarious financial position could afford to wear a fur-lined
coat with a new astrachan collar it did not strike Olivia to enquire.
That he, like herself, was warm on that sun-filled morning, with the sea
dancing and sparkling away beyond them, and human types around them
exuding the prosperity of peace, seemed sufficient for the comfortable
hour. He spoke of his early years of ease, of his modest patrimony
coming to an end soon after the war broke out; of his commission in a
yeomanry regiment; of his heart-break as the months went on and the
chance of the regiment being sent to the front grew less and less; of
his exchange into a regiment of the line; of the rotten heart that gave
out after a month in France; of his grief at being invalided out of the
army and his struggles and anxieties when he returned to civil life,
branded as physically unfit. He had tried the stage, musical comedy,
male youth in the manless chorus being eagerly welcomed; then, after a
little training, he found he had the dancer’s gift. “So one thing led to
another,” said he, “and that’s my history.”

“But surely,” said Olivia, “all this dancing and these late hours must
be very bad for your heart.”

He smiled sadly. “What does it matter? I’m no use to anybody, and nobody
cares whether I’m dead or alive.”

Olivia protested warmly. “The world is crying out for young men of
three-and-twenty. You could be useful in a million ways.”

“Not a crock like me.”

“You could go into an office.”

“Yes. In at one door and out of another. Hopeless.”

He drew from a slim gold case a Turkish cigarette—Olivia, minutely
hospitable, had put a box of a hundred in his room—and tapped it
thoughtfully.

“After all, which is better—to carry on with life like a worm—which
anyhow perisheth, as the Bible tells us—or to go out like a butterfly,
with a bit of a swagger?”

“But you mustn’t talk of going out,” cried Olivia. “It’s indecent.”

Bobby lighted his cigarette. “Who would care?”

“I, for one,” she replied.

Her health and sanity revolted against morbid ideas. He stretched out
his hand, and, with the tips of his fingers, touched her coat, and he
bent his dark brown eyes upon her.

“Would you really?” he murmured.

She flushed, felt angry she scarce knew why, and put herself swiftly on
the defensive.

“I would care for the life of any young man. After a million killed it’s
precious—and every decent girl would care the same as I.”

“You’re wonderful!” he remarked.

“I’m common sense incarnate,” said Olivia.

“You are. You’re right. You’re right a thousand times,” he replied.
“I’ll always remember what you have said to me this morning.”

At his surrender she disarmed. A corpulent, opulent couple passed them
by, the lady wearing a cheap feathered hat and a rope of pearls outside
a Kolinsky coat, the gentleman displaying on an ungloved right hand,
which maintained in his mouth a gigantic cigar, an enormous ruby set in
a garden border of diamonds.

“At any rate,” said Bobby, “I’m not as some other men are.”

So they laughed and discussed the profiteers and walked back to the
hotel for lunch with the sharpened appetites of twenty.

When Bobby Quinton left them, Olivia reproached herself for lack of
sympathy. The boy had done his best. A rotten, and crocky heart, who was
she to despise? But for circumstance he might have done heroic things.
Perhaps in his defiance of physical disability he was doing a heroic
thing even now. Still. . . . To Lydia, in an ironically teasing mood,
she declared:

“When I do fall in love, it’s not going to be with any one like Bobby
Quinton. I want a man—there would be a devil of a row, of course, if he
tried—but one capable of beating me.”

“Bobby would do that, right enough, if you gave him the chance,” said
Lydia.

Olivia reflected for a while. “Why have you got your knife into him like
that?” she asked abruptly.

“I haven’t, my dear child. If I had, do you think I would have allowed
him to come down? I live and let live. By letting live, I live very
comfortably and manage, with moderate means, to have a very good time.”

Olivia, already dressed for dinner, looked down on the easy, creamy,
handsome, kimono-clad woman, curled up like a vast Angora cat on the
hotel bedroom sofa, and once more was dimly conscious of a doubt whether
the galley of Lydia Dawlish was the one for her mother’s daughter to row
in.

Still, _vogue la galère_. When she returned to London there was little
else to do. Eating and dancing filled many of her days and nights. She
tried to recapture the pleasure of books which had been all her
recreation for years; but, although her life was not a continuous whirl
of engagements—for it requires a greater vogue as a pretty and
unattached young woman than Olivia possessed to be booked for fourteen
meals and seven evenings every week of the year—she found little time
for solitary intelligent occupation. If she was at a loose end, Lydia’s
hat shop provided an agreeable pastime. Or, as a thousand little odds
and ends of dress demanded attention, there was always a sensuous hour
or two to be spent at Pacotille’s and Luquin’s or Deville’s. Tea
companions seldom failed. When she had no evening engagements she was
glad to get to bed, soon after the dinner in the downstairs restaurant,
and to sleep the sleep of untroubled youth. And all the time the spell
of London still held her captive. To walk the crowded streets, to join
the feminine crush before the plate-glass windows of great shops, to
watch the strange birds in the ornamental water in St. James’s Park, to
wander about the Abbey and the Temple Gardens, to enter on the moment’s
impulse a Bond Street picture gallery or a cinema—all was a matter of
young joy and thrill. She even spent a reckless and rapturous afternoon
at Madame Tussaud’s. Sometimes Janet Philimore accompanied her on these
excursions round the monuments of London. Janet, who had mild
antiquarian tastes and a proletarian knowledge of London traffic, took
her by tubes and buses to the old City churches and the Tower, and
exhibited to her wondering gaze the Bank of England and the Royal
Exchange and Guildhall up the narrow street. For sentimental interest,
there was always Bobby Quinton, who continued to maintain himself under
her maternal eye. And so the new life went on.

It was one night in April, while she was standing under the porch of a
theatre, Mouregard, her escort, having gone in search of his
dinner-and-theatre brougham—for those were days when taxis were scarce
and drivers haughty—that she found herself addressed by a long-nosed,
one-armed man, who raised his hat.

“Miss Gale—I’m sure you don’t remember me.”

For a second or two she could not place him. Then she laughed.

“Why—Major Olifant!” She shook hands. “What are you doing here? I
thought you were buried among your fossils. Do tell me—how are the
hot-water pipes? And how is the parrot? Myra has no faith in your
bachelor housekeeping and is sure you’ve eaten him out of desperation.”

He returned a light answer. Then, touching the arm of a man standing by
his side:

“Miss Gale—can I introduce Mr. Alexis Triona.”

Triona bowed, stood uncovered while he took the hand which Olivia held
out.

“This is my landlady,” said Olifant.

“He is privileged beyond the common run of mortals,” said Triona.

“That’s very pretty,” laughed Olivia, with a swift, enveloping glance at
the slight, inconspicuous youth who had done such wonderful things.
“I’ve not thought of myself as a landlady before. I hope I don’t look
like one.”

Visions of myriad Bloomsbury lodging-houses at whose doors he had
knocked after he had left the tiny room in Cherbury Mews, and of the
strange middle-aged women of faded gentility whom he had interviewed
within those doors, rose before Triona’s eyes, and he laughed too. For
under the strong electric light of the portico, unkind to most of the
other waiting women, showing up lines and hollows and artificialities of
complexion, she looked as fresh and young as a child on a May morning.
The open theatre wrap revealed her slender girlish figure, sketchily
clad in a flame-coloured garment; and, with the light in her eyes and
her little dark head proudly poised, she stood before the man’s fancy as
the flame of youth.

She turned to Olifant.

“Are you in town?”

“For a few days. Getting rid of cobwebs.”

“I’d lend you quite a nice broom, if you could find time to come and see
me. Besides, I do want to hear about my beloved Polly.”

“I shall be delighted,” said Olifant.

They arranged that he should come to tea at the flat the following day.

“And if so famous a person as Mr. Triona would honour me, too?”

“Dare I?” he asked.

“It’s on the fifth floor, but there’s a lift.”

She saw Mauregard hurrying up. With a “Four-thirty, then,” and a smile
of adieu, she turned and joined Mauregard.

“Shall we go on to Percy’s?” asked the young Frenchman, standing at the
door of the brougham.

Olivia conceived a sudden distaste for Percy’s.

“Not unless you particularly want to.”

“I? Good Lord!” said he.

“Why do you ever go, if it bores you like that?” she asked as the
brougham started Victoria-wards.

“_Ce que femme veut, Mauregard le veut._”

“I suppose that is why you’ve never made love to me.”

“How?” he asked, surprised out of his perfect English idiom.

“I’ve wanted you not to make love to me, and you haven’t.”

“But how could I make love to you, when I have been persecuting you with
the confessions of my unhappy love affairs?”

“One can always find a means,” said Olivia. “That’s why I like you. You
are such a good friend.”

“I hope so,” said he. Then, after a short silence: “Let me be frank.
What is going on at the back of your clever English mind is perfectly
accurate. I am tempted to make love to you every time I see you. What
man, with a man’s blood in his veins, wouldn’t be tempted, no matter how
much he loved another woman? But I say to myself: ‘Lucien, you are
French to the marrow of your bones. It is the nature of that marrow not
to offend a beautiful woman by not making love to her. But, on the other
hand, the Lady Olivia whose finger-tips I am unworthy to kiss’—he
touched them with his lips, however, in the most charming manner—‘is
English to the marrow of _her_ bones, and it is the nature of that
marrow to be offended if a man makes obviously idle love to her.’ So,
not wishing to lose my Lady Olivia, whose friendship and sympathy I
value so highly, I accept with a grateful heart a position which would
be incomprehensible to the vast majority of my fellow-countrymen.”

“I’m so glad we’ve had this out,” said Olivia after a pause. “I’ve been
a bit worried. A girl on her own has got to take care of herself, you
know. And you’ve been so beautifully kind to me——”

“It’s because I am proud to call myself your humble and devoted
servant,” replied Mauregard.

Olivia went to bed contented with this frank explanation. Men had
already made love to her in a manner which had ruffled her serene
consciousness, and she found it, not like Lydia Dawlish, a cynical game
of wit, but a disagreeable business, to parry their advances. Bobby
Quinton, of course, she could put into a corner like a naughty child,
whenever he became foolish. But Mauregard, consistently respectful and
entertaining, had been rather a puzzle. Now that way was clear.

For a while she did not associate her meeting Blaise Olifant with her
distaste for the night club. In the flush of her new existence she had
almost forgotten him. There had been no reason to correspond. His rent
was paid through the Trivett and Gale office. His foraminiferous
pursuits did not appeal to a girl’s imagination. Now and then she gave a
passing thought to what was happening in her old home, and vaguely
remembered that the romantically named traveller was there as a guest.
But that was all. Now, the presence of Olifant had suddenly recalled the
little scene in her mother’s room, when she had suddenly decided to let
him have the house; he had brought with him a breath of that room; a
swift memory of the delicate water-colours and the books by the bedside,
the _Pensées de Pascal_ and _The Imitation of Christ_. . . . Besides,
she had felt a curious attraction towards the companion, the boy with
the foreign manner and the glistening eyes and the suffering-stricken
face. Both men, as she conceived them, belonged to the higher
intellectual type that had their being remote from the inanities of
dissipation. So, impelled by a muddled set of motives, she suddenly
found herself abhorring Percy’s. She read herself into a state of
chastened self-approbation, and then to sleep, with Rupert Brooke’s
poems.


                              CHAPTER VII

OLIVIA sat by her little table, dispensing tea and accepting homage with
a flutter of pleasure at her heart. She had been oddly nervous—she who
had entertained the stranger Olifant, at Medlow, with the greatest
self-confidence, and had grown to regard tea parties at the flat as
commonplaces of existence. The two men had drifted in from another
sphere. She had reviewed her stock of conversation and found it
shop-worn after five months’ exposure. The most recent of her views on
“Hullo, People!” and on the food at the Carlton had appeared unworthy of
the notice of the soldier-scientist and the adventurous man of letters.
She had received them with unusual self-consciousness. This, however, a
few moments of intercourse dispelled. They had come, they had seen and
she had conquered.

“At first I didn’t recognize you,” said Olifant. “I had to look twice to
make sure.”

“Have I changed so much?” she asked.

“It was a trick of environment,” he said, with a smile in his dark blue
eyes.

The feminine in her caught the admiration behind them and delightedly
realized his confusion, the night before, at her metamorphosis from the
prim little black-frocked quakeress into the radiant creature in furs
and jewels and flame-coloured audacity.

“And now you’re quite sure it is me—or I—which is it?”

“I’m quite sure it’s my charming landlady who for the second time feeds
the hungry wanderer. Miss Gale, Triona, makes a specialty of it.”

“Then, indeed, I’m peculiarly fortunate,” said Triona, taking a tomato
sandwich. “Will you feed me again, Miss Gale?”

“As often as you like,” she laughed.

“That’s rather a rash promise to make to a professional vagabond like
myself. When he has begged his way for months and months at a time, he
comes to regard other people’s food as his by divine right.”

“Have you done that?” she asked.

“Much worse. You don’t keep chickens?”

“Not here.”

“That’s a good thing. I think I’m the world’s champion chicken-stealer.
It’s a trick of legerdemain. You dive at a chicken, catch it by its
neck, whirl it round and stick it under your jacket all in one action.
The unconscious owner has only to turn his back for a second. Then, of
course, you hide in a wood and have an orgy.”

“He is not the desperate character he makes himself out to be,” said
Olifant. “He spent two months with me at ‘The Towers’ without molesting
one of your hens.”

“Then you’re not still there?” she asked Triona.

“Alas, no,” he replied. “I suppose I have the fever of perpetual change.
I had a letter from Finland saying that my presence might be of use
there. So I have spent this spring in Helsingfors. I am only just back.”

“It seems wonderful to go and come among all these strange places,” said
Olivia.

“One land is much the same as another in essentials,” replied Triona.
“To carry on life you have to eat and sleep. There’s no difference
between a hard-boiled egg in Somerset and a hard-boiled egg in Tobolsk.
And sleep is sleep, whether you’re putting up at Claridge’s or the Hotel
of the Beautiful Star. And human nature, stripped of the externals of
habits, customs, traditions, ceremonials, is unchanging from one
generation, and from one latitude or longitude, to another.”

“But,” objected Olivia, with a flash of logic, “if London’s the same as
Tobolsk, why yearn for Tobolsk?”

“It’s the hope of finding something different—the _ignis fatuus_, the
Jack o’ Lantern, the Will-o’-the-Wisp——” He was silent for a moment,
and then she caught the flash of his eyes. “It’s the only thing that
counts in human progress. The Will-o’-the-Wisp. It leaves nine hundred
and ninety-nine men out of a thousand floundering in a bog—but the
thousandth man wins through to the Land of Promise. There is only one
thing in life to do,” he continued, clenching his nervous hands and
looking into the distance away from Olivia, “and that is never to lose
faith in your _ignis fatuus_—to compel it to be your guiding star. Once
you’ve missed grip of it, you’re lost.”

“I wish I had your Russian idealism,” said Olifant.

“When will you learn, my dear friend,” said Triona quietly, “that I’m
not a Russian? I’m as English as you are.”

“It’s your idealism that is Russian,” said Olivia.

“Do you think so?” he asked, deferentially. “Well, perhaps it is. In
England you keep your ideals hidden until some great catastrophe
happens, then you bring them out to help you along. Otherwise it is
immodest to expose them. In Russia, ideals are exposed all the time, so
that when the time for their application comes, they’re worn so thin
they’re useless. Poor Russia,” he sighed. “It has idealized itself to
extinction. All my boyhood’s companions—the students, the
_intelligentsia_, as they called themselves, who used to sit and talk
and talk for hours of their wonderful theories—you in England have no
idea how Russian visionary can talk—and I learned to talk with
them—where are they now? The fortunate were killed in action. The
others, either massacred or rotting in prisons, or leading the filthy
hunted lives of pariah dogs. The Beast arose like a foul shape from the
Witch’s cauldron of their talk . . . and devoured them. Yes, perhaps the
stolid English way is the better.”

“What about your Will-o’-the-Wisp theory?” asked Olivia.

He threw out his hands. “Ah! That is the secret. Keep it to yourself.
Don’t point it out to a thousand people, and say: ‘Join me in the chase
of the Will-o’-the-Wisp.’ For the thousand other people will each see an
_ignis fatuus_ of their own and point it out, so that there are myriads
of them, and your brain reels, and you’re swallowed up in the bog to a
dead certainty. In plain words, every human being must have his own
individual and particular guiding star which he must follow steadfastly.
My guiding star is not yours, Miss Gale, nor Olifant’s. We each have our
own.”

Olifant smiled indulgently. “_Moscovus loquitur_,” he murmured.

“What’s that?” asked Olivia.

“He says, my dear Miss Gale, that the Russian will ever be talking.”

“I’m not so sure that I don’t approve,” said she.

Triona laid his hand on his heart and made a little bow. She went on,
casting a rebuking glance at Olifant, who had begun to laugh:

“After all, it’s more entertaining and stimulating to talk about ideas
than about stupid facts. Most people seem to regard an idea as a
disease. They shy at it as if it were smallpox.”

Olifant protested. He was capable of playing football with ideas as any
man. Self-satirical, he asked was he not of Balliol? Olivia, remembering
opportunely a recent Cambridge dinner neighbour’s criticism of the
famous Oxford College—at the time it had bored her indifferent
mind—and an anecdote with which he drove home his remarks, that of a
sixth-form contemporary who had written to him in the prime flush of his
freshman’s term: “Balliol is not a college; it is a School of Thought,”
cried out:

“Isn’t that rather a crude metaphor for Balliol?”

They quarrelled, drifted away from the point, swept Triona into a
laughing argument on she knew not what. All she knew was that these two
men were giving her the best of themselves; these two picked men of
thought and action; that they were eager to interest her, to catch her
word of approval; that some dancing thing within her brain played on
their personalities and kept them at concert pitch.

She was conscious of a new joy, a new sense of power, when the door
opened and Myra showed in Lydia Dawlish. She entered, enveloped in an
atmosphere of furs and creamy worldliness. Aware of the effect of
implicit scorn of snobbery, she besought Olifant for news of Medlow,
dear Sleepy Hollow, which she had not seen for years. Had he come across
her beloved eccentric of a father—old John Freke? Olifant gave her the
best of news. He had lately joined the committee of the local hospital,
of which Mr. Freke was Chairman; professed admiration for John Freke’s
exceptional gifts.

“If he had gone out into the world, he might have been a great man,”
said Lydia.

“He _is_ a great man,” replied Olifant.

“What’s the good of being great in an overlooked chunk of the Stone Age
like Medlow?”

She spoke with her lazy vivacity, obviously, to Olivia’s observant eye,
seeking to establish herself with the two men. But the spell of the
afternoon was broken. As soon as politeness allowed, Olifant and Triona
took their leave. Had it not been for Lydia they would have stayed on
indefinitely, forgetful of time, showing unconscious, and thereby all
the more flattering, homage to their hostess. In a mild way she
anathematized Lydia; but found a compensating tickle of pleasure in the
lady’s failure to captivate.

To Olifant she said:

“Now that you know where your landlady lives, I hope you won’t go on
neglecting her.”

But she waited for Triona to say:

“Shall I ever have the pleasure of seeing you again?”

“It all depends whether you can be communicated with,” she replied.
“Alexis Triona, Esq., Planet Earth, Solar System, is an imposing
address; but it might puzzle the General Post Office.”

“The Vanloo Hotel, South Kensington, is very much more modest.”

“It’s well for people to know where they can find one another,” said
Olivia.

“That you should do me the honour of the slightest thought of finding
me——” he began.

“We’ll fix up something soon,” Lydia interrupted. “I’m Miss Gale’s
elderly, adopted aunt.”

Olivia felt a momentary shock, as though a tiny bolt of ice had passed
through her. She sped a puzzled glance at a Lydia blandly unconscious of
wrong-doing.

“I shall be delighted,” said Triona politely.

When the door had closed behind the two—

“What nice men,” said Lydia.

“Yes, they’re rather—nice,” replied Olivia, wondering why, in trying to
qualify them in her mind, this particular adjective had never occurred
to her. They were male, they spoke perfect English, they were
well-mannered—and so, of course, they were nice. But it was such an
inadequate word, completing no idea. Lydia’s atrophied sense of
differentiation awoke the laughter in her eyes. Nice! So were Bobby
Quinton, Sydney Rooke, Mauregard, a score of other commonplace types in
Lydia’s set. But that Blaise Olifant and Alexis Triona should be lumped
with them in this vaguely designated category, seemed funny.

Lydia went on:

“Major Olifant, of course, I knew from your description of him; but the
other—the young man with the battered face—I didn’t place him.”

“Triona—Alexis Triona.”

“I seem to have heard the name,” said Lydia. “He writes or paints or
lectures on Eugenics or something.”

“He has written a book on Russia,” replied Olivia drily.

“I’m fed up with Russia,” said Lydia dismissively. “Even if I wasn’t—I
didn’t come here to talk about it. I came in about something quite
different. What do you think has happened? Sydney Rooke has asked me to
marry him.”

Olivia’s eyes flashed with the interest of genuine youth in a romantic
proposal of marriage.

“My dear!” she cried. “How exciting!”

“I wish it were,” said Lydia, in her grey-eyed calmness. “Anyhow, it’s a
bit upsetting. Of course I knew that he was married—separated years and
years from his wife. Whether he couldn’t catch her out, or she couldn’t
catch him out, I don’t know. But they couldn’t get a divorce. She was a
Catholic and wouldn’t stand for the usual arrangement. Now she’s dead.
Died a couple of months ago in California. He came in this morning with
Lady Northborough—introducing her—the first time I had seen the woman.
And he sat by and gave advice while she chose half a dozen hats. His
judgment’s infallible, you know. He saw her to her car and came back.
‘Now I’ve done you a good turn,’ he said, ‘perhaps you’ll do me one.
Give me five minutes with you in your cubby-hole.’ We went into my
little office, and then he sprang this on me—the death of his wife and
the proposal.”

“But it _must_ have been exciting,” Olivia protested. “Yet——” she
knitted her brow, “why the Lady Northborough barrage?”

“It’s his way,” said Lydia.

“What did you tell him?”

“I said I would give him my answer to-night.”

“Well?”

“I don’t know. He’s charming. He’s rolling in money—you remember the
motor-car I turned down for obvious reasons—he knows all kinds of nice
people—he’s fifty——”

“Fifty!” cried Olivia, aghast. To three and twenty fifty is senile.

“The widow’s ideal.”

“It’s exciting, but not romantic,” said Olivia.

“Romance perished on the eleventh of November, 1918. Since then it has
been ‘Every woman for herself and the Devil take the hindmost.’ Are you
aware that there are not half enough men to go round? So when a man with
twenty thousand a year comes along, a woman has to think like—like——”

“Like Aristotle or Herbert Spencer, or the sailor’s parrot,” said
Olivia. “Of course, dear. But is he so dreadfully wealthy as all that?
What does he do?”

“He attends Boards of Directors. As far as I can make out he belongs to
a Society for the Promotion of Un-christian Companies.”

“Don’t you care for him?”

Lydia shook her exquisitely picture-hatted head—she was a creamy
Gainsborough or nothing.

“In that way, not a bit. Of course, he has been a real good friend to
me. But after all—marriage—it’s difficult to explain——”

In spite of her cynicism, Lydia had always respected the girlhood of her
friend. But Olivia flung the scornful arm of authority.

“There’s no need of explanation. I know all about it.”

“In that case——” said Lydia. She paused, lit a cigarette, and with her
large, feline grace of writhing curves, settled herself more comfortably
in the corner of the couch—“I thought you would bring a fresh mind to
bear upon things. But no matter. In that case, dear, what would you
advise?”

Before the girl’s mental vision arose the man in question—the old young
man, the man of fifty, with the air and manner and dress of the man of
twenty-five; his mark of superficial perfection that hid God knew what
strange sins, stoniness of heart and blight of spirit. She saw him in
his impeccable devotion to Lydia. But something in the imagined sight of
him sent a shiver through her pure, yet not ignorant, maidenhood:
something of which the virginal within her defied definition, yet
something abhorrent. The motor-car had failed; now the wedding-ring. She
recaptured the fleeting, disquieting sense of Lydia on her first evening
in London—the woman’s large proclamation of sex. Instinctively she
transferred her impression to the man, and threw a swift glance at Lydia
lying there, milk and white, receptive.

A word once read and forgotten—a word in some French or English
novel—sprang to her mind, scraped clear from the palimpsest of memory.
Desirable. A breath-catching, hateful word. She stood aghast and
shrinking on the edge of knowledge.

“My darling child, what on earth is the matter with you?”

Olivia started at the voice, as though awakening from a dream.

“I think it’s horrible,” she cried.

“What?”

“Marrying a man you can no more love than—— Ugh! I wouldn’t marry him
for thousands of millions.”

“Why? I want to know.”

But the shiver in the girl’s soul could not be expressed in words.

“It’s a question of love,” she said lamely.

Lydia laughed, called her a romantic child. It was not a question of
love, but of compatible temperament. Marriage wasn’t a week-end, but a
life-end, trip. People had to get accustomed to each other in
dressing-gowns and undress manners. She herself was sure that Sydney
Rooke would wear the most Jermyn Street of dressing-gowns, at any rate.
But the manners?

“They’ll always be as polished as his finger-nails,” said Olivia.

“I don’t see why you should speak like that of Sydney,” cried Lydia,
with some show of spirit. “It’s rather ungrateful seeing how kind he has
been to you.”

Which was true; Olivia admitted it.

“But the man who is kind to you, in a social way, isn’t always the man
you would like to marry.”

“But it’s I, not you,” Lydia protested, “who am going to marry him.”

“Then you are going to marry him?”

“I don’t see anything else to do,” replied Lydia, and she went again
over the twenty thousand a year argument. Olivia saw that her
hesitations were those of a cool brain and not of an ardent spirit, and
she knew that the brain had already come to a decision.

“I quite see,” said Lydia half apologetically, “that you think I ought
to wait until I fall in love with a man. But I should have to wait till
Doomsday. I thought I was in love with poor dear Fred. But I wasn’t. I’m
not that sort. If Fred had gone on living I should have gone on letting
him adore me and have been perfectly happy—so long as he didn’t expect
me to adore him.”

“Doesn’t Mr. Rooke expect you to adore him?” asked Olivia.

Lydia laughed, showing her white teeth, and shook a wise and mirthful
head.

“I’m convinced that was the secret of his first unhappy marriage.”

“What?”

“The poor lady adored him and bored him to frenzy.”

The clock on the mantelpiece struck the half-hour after six. Lydia rose.
She must go home and dress. She was dining with Rooke at Claridge’s at
eight.

“I’m so glad we’ve had this little talk,” she said. “I felt I must tell
you.”

“I thought you wanted my advice,” said Olivia.

“Oh, you silly!” answered Lydia, gathering her furs around her.

They exchanged the conventional parting kiss. Olivia accompanied her to
the landing. When the summoned lift appeared and its doors clashed open,
Lydia said:

“You wouldn’t like to take over that hat shop at a valuation, would
you?”

“Good heavens, no!” cried the astounded Olivia.

Lydia laughed and waved a grey-gloved hand and disappeared downwards,
like the Lady of the Venusberg in an antiquated opera.

Olivia re-entered the flat thoughtfully, and sat down in an arm-chair by
the tiny wood fire in the sitting-room grate. Lydia and Lydia’s galley,
and all that it signified, disturbed her more than ever. They seemed not
only to have no ideals even as ballast, but to have flung them overboard
like so many curse-ridden Jonahs. To what soulless land was she speeding
with them? And not only herself, but the England, of which she, as much
as any individual, was a representative unit? Was it for the reaching of
such a haven that her brothers had given their lives? Was it that she
should reach such a haven that her mother, instinct with heroic passion,
had sent Stephen Gale forth to death? Was it to guide the world on this
Lydian path that Blaise Olifant had given an arm and young Triona had
cheerfully endured Dantesque torturings?

Myra came in and began to remove the tea-things—Myra, gaunt, with her
impassive, inexpressible face, correct in black; silk blouse, stuff
skirt, silk apron. Olivia, disturbed in her efforts to solve the riddle
of existence, swerved in her chair and half-humorously sought the first
human aid to hand.

“Myra, tell me. Why do you go on living?”

Myra made no pause in her methodical activity.

“God put me into the world to live. It’s my duty to live,” she replied
in her toneless way. “And God ordained me to live so that I should do my
duty.”

“And what do you think is your duty?” Olivia asked.

“You, of all people in the world, ought to know that,” said Myra,
holding the door open with her foot, so as to clear a passage for the
tea-tray.

Olivia rested her elbows on the arms of the chair and put her
finger-tips to her temples. She felt at once rebuked and informed with
knowledge. Never before had the Sphinx-like Myra so revealed herself.
Probably she had not had the opportunity, never having found herself
subjected to such direct questioning. Being so subjected, she replied
with the unhesitating directness of her nature. The grace of humility
descended on Olivia. What fine spirit can feel otherwise than humble
when confronted with the selfless devotion of a fellow-being? And
further humbled was she by the implicit declaration of an ideal, noble
and purposeful, such as her mind for the past few months had not
conceived. This elderly, spinsterly foundling, child of naught, had,
according to her limited horizon, a philosophy—nay, more—a religion of
life which she unswervingly followed. According to the infinite scale
whereby human values ultimately are estimated, Olivia judged herself
sitting in the galley of Lydia Dawlish as of far less account than Myra,
her butt and her slave from earliest infancy.

She rose and looked around the prettiness of taste and colour with which
she had transformed the original dully-furnished room, and threw up her
arm in a helpless gesture. What did it all mean? What was she doing
there? On what was she squandering the golden hours of her youth? To
what end was she using such of a mind and such of a soul as God had
given her? At last, to sell herself for furs and food and silk cushions,
and for the society of other women clamorous of nothing but furs and
food and silk cushions, to a man like Sydney Rooke—without giving him
anything in return save her outward shape for him to lay jewels on and
exhibit to the uninspiring world wherein he dwelt?

Far better return to Medlow and lead the life of a clean woman.

Myra entered. “You’re not dining out to-night?”

“No, thank God!” said Olivia. “I’ll slip on any old thing and go
downstairs.”

She dined in her little quiet corner of the restaurant, and after dinner
took up Triona’s book, _Through Blood and Snow_, which she had bought
that morning, her previous acquaintance with it having been made through
a circulating library. In the autumn she had read and been held by its
magic; but casually as she had read scores of books. But now it was
instinct with a known yet baffling personality. It was two o’clock in
the morning before she went to bed.


                              CHAPTER VIII

THE tastes of Alexis Triona were not such as to lead him into
extravagant living on the fruits of his literary success. To quality of
food he was indifferent; wine he neither understood nor cared for; in
the use of other forms of alcohol he was abstemious; unlike most men
bred in Russia he smoked moderately, preferring the cigarettes he rolled
himself from Virginia tobacco to the more expensive Turkish or Egyptian
brands. His attire was simple. He would rather walk than be driven; and
he regarded his back-bedroom at the top of the Vanloo Hotel as a
luxurious habitation.

He had broken away from the easeful life at Medlow because, as he
explained to Blaise Olifant, it frightened him.

“I’m up against nothing here,” said he.

“You’re up against your novel,” replied Olifant. “A man’s work is always
his fiercest enemy.”

Triona would not accept the proposition. He and his novel were one and
indivisible. Together they must fight against something—he knew not
what. Perhaps, fight against time and opportunity. They wanted the
tense, stolen half-hours which he and his other book had enjoyed. Would
Olifant think him ungrateful if he picked up and went on his mission to
Helsingfors?

“My dear fellow,” said Olifant, “the man who resents a friend developing
his own personality in his own way doesn’t deserve to have a friend.”

“It’s like you to say that,” cried Triona. “I shall always remember.
When I get back I shall let you know.”

So Alexis Triona vanished from a uninspiring Medlow, and two months
afterwards gave Olifant his address at the Vanloo Hotel. Olifant, tired
by a long spell of close work, went up for an idle week in London.

“Come back and carry on as before,” he suggested.

But Triona ran his fingers through his brown hair and held out his hand.

“No. The wise man never tries to repeat a past pleasure. As a wise old
Russian friend of mine used to say—never relight a cigar.”

So after a few days of pleasant companionship in the soberer delights of
town, Blaise Olifant returned to Medlow and Triona remained in his
little back room in the Vanloo Hotel.

                 *        *        *        *        *

One night, a week or so after his visit to Olivia Gale, he threw down
his pen, read over the last sheet that he had written, and, with a
gesture of impatience, tore it up. Suddenly he discovered that he could
not breathe in the stuffy bedroom. He drew back the curtains and opened
the window and looked out on myriad chimney-pots and a full moon shining
on them from a windless sky. The bright air filled his lungs. Desire for
wider spaces beneath the moon shook him like a touch of claustrophobia.
He thrust on the coat which he had discarded, seized a hat, and,
switching off the light, hurried from the room. He went out into the
streets, noiseless save for the rare, swift motors that flashed by like
ghosts fleeing terrified from some earthly doom.

He walked and walked until he suddenly realized that he had emerged from
Whitehall and faced the moonlight beauty of the Houses of Parliament
standing in majestic challenge against the sky, and the Abbey sleeping
in its centuries of dreams.

Away across the Square, by Broad Sanctuary, was the opening of a great
thoroughfare, and, as his eyes sought it, he confessed to himself the
subconscious impulse that had led him thither. Yet was it not a cheat of
a subconscious impulse? Had he not gone out from the hotel in Kensington
with a definite purpose? As he crossed to Broad Sanctuary and the
entrance to Victoria Street, he argued it out with himself. Anyhow, it
was the most fool of fool-errands. But yet—he shrugged his shoulders
and laughed. To what errand could a fool’s errand be comparable? Only to
that of one pixy-led. He laughed at the thought of his disquisition to
Olivia on the Will-o’-the-Wisp. In the rare instances of the follower of
Faith had he not proclaimed its guidance to the Land of Promise?

Three days before he had seen her. He had been impelled by an
irresistible desire to see her. To call on her without shadow of excuse
was impossible. To telephone or write an invitation to lunch was an act
unsuggested by his limited social experience. Taking his chance that she
should emerge between eleven and twelve, he strolled up and down the
pavement, so that at last when fate favoured him and he advanced to meet
her, they greeted each other with a smiling air of surprise. They
explained their respective objectives. She was for buying a patent
coffee machine at the Army and Navy Stores, he for catching an
undesirable train at Victoria Station. A threatening morning suddenly
became a rainy noon. He turned back with her and they fled together and
just reached the Stores in time to escape from the full fury of the
downpour. There he bent his mind on coffee machines. His masculine
ignorance of the whole art of coffee-making, a flannel bag in a jug
being his primitive conception, moved her to light-hearted mirth. The
purchase made, the order given, they wandered idly through the great
establishment. They were prisoners, the outside world being weltering
deluge. For once in his lifetime, thought Triona, the elements warred on
his side. A wringing machine, before which he paused in wonderment at
its possible use, and an eager description on the part of the salesman,
put Olivia on the track of a game into which he entered with devoted
fervour. Let them suppose they were going to furnish a house. Oh! a
great big palace of a house. In imagination they bought innumerable
things, furnishing the mansion chiefly with hammocks and marquees and
garden chairs and lawn-mowers and grand pianos and egg-whisks. Her
heart, that morning, attuned to laughter, brought colour into her cheeks
and brightness into her eyes. To the young man’s ear she seemed to have
an adorable gift of phrase. She invested a rolling-pin with a humorous
individuality. She touched a tray of doughnuts with her fancy and turned
them into sacramental bread of Momus, exquisite Divinity of Mirth. She
was so free, so graceful, so intimate, so irresistible. He followed her,
a young man bemused. What he contributed to the game he scarcely knew.
He was only conscious of her charm and her whipping of his wit. They
stumbled into the department of men’s haberdashery. His brain conceived
a daring idea.

“I’ve been trying for weeks,” said he, “to make up my mind to buy a
tie.”

Olivia glanced swiftly round and sped to a counter.

“Ties, please.”

“What kind?” asked the salesman.

“Ordinary silk—sailor-knot. Show me all you’ve got.”

Before his entranced eyes she selected half a dozen, with a taste which
the artist within him knew was impeccable. He presented the bill bearing
her number at the cashier’s pigeon hole, and returning took the neat
packet from the salesman with the air of one receiving a decoration from
royalty. They made their way to the exit. She said:

“I’m afraid we’ve been criminally frivolous.”

“If such happiness is a crime I’d willingly swing for it.”

He noted a quick, uncomprehending question in her glance and the colour
mounted into his pale cheeks.

“My English idiom is not yet perfect,” he said. “I ought not to have
used that expression.”

Olivia laughed at his discomfiture.

“It’s generally used by dreadful people who threaten to do one another
in. But the metaphor’s thrilling, all the same.”

The rain had ceased. After a few moments the mackintoshed commissionaire
secured a taxi. Triona accompanied her to the door. She thrust out a
frank hand.

“Au revoir. It has been delightful to find you so human.”

She drove off. He stood, with a smile on his lips, watching the vehicle
disappear in the traffic. Her farewell was characteristic. What could
one expect of her but the unexpected?

That was three days ago. The image of her unconsciously alluring yet
frank to disconcertment, spiritually feminine yet materially impatient
of sex; the image of her in the three separate settings—the dark-eyed
princess in fur and flame beneath the electric light of the theatre
portico; the slim girl in simple blouse and skirt who, over the pretty
teacups, held so nice a balance between Olifant and himself; the gay
playmate of a rainy hour, in her fawn costume (he still felt the thrill
of the friendly touch of her fawn-coloured gloved hands on his
sleeve)—the composite image and vision of her had filled his sleeping
and waking thoughts to the destruction of his peace of mind and the
dislocation of his work.

Thus, on this warm night of spring, he stood, the most foolishly
romantical of mortals, at the entrance to Victoria Street, and with a
shrug of his shoulders proceeded on his errand of mute troubadour.
Perhaps the day of rapture might come when he would tell her how he
stood in the watches of the night and gazed up at what he had to imagine
was her window on the fifth floor of the undistinguished barrack that
was her home. It was poetic, fantastic, Russian, at any rate. It would
also mark the end of his excursion; it was a fair tramp back to South
Kensington.

An unheeded taxi-cab whizzed past him as he walked; but a few seconds
later, the faint sound of splintering glass and then the scrunch of
brakes suddenly applied awoke him from his smiling meditations. The cab
stopped, sharply outlined in the clear moonlight. The driver leaped from
his seat and flung open the door. A woman sprang out, followed by a man.
Both were in evening dress. Voices rose at once in altercation. Triona,
suspecting an accident, quickened his pace instinctively into a run and
joined the group.

“What’s up?”

But as the instinctive words passed his lips he became amazedly
conscious of Olivia standing there, quivering, as white as the white
dress and cloak she wore, her eyes ablaze. She flashed on him a
half-hysterical recognition and clutched his arm.

“You?”

He drew himself up to his slim height and looked first at the taxi
driver and then at the heavy, swarthy man in evening dress, and then at
her.

“What’s the matter? Tell me,” he rapped out.

“This man tried to insult me,” she gasped.

Olivia never knew how it happened: it happened like some instantaneous
visitation of God. The lithe young figure suddenly shot forward and the
heavy man rolled yards away on the pavement.

“Serve him damn well right,” said the driver; “but where do I come in
with my window broken?”

“Oh, you shall be paid, you shall be paid,” cried Olivia. “Pay him, Mr.
Triona, and let us go.”

Triona glanced up and down the street. “No, this gentleman’s going to
pay,” he said quietly and advanced to the heavy man who had scrambled to
unsteady feet.

“Just you settle up with that cabman, quick, do you hear, or I’ll knock
you down again. I could knock you down sixty times an hour. And so help
me, God, if a copper comes in sight I’ll murder you.”

“All right, all right,” said the man hurriedly. “I don’t want a scandal
for the lady’s sake.” He turned to the taxi man. “How much do you want?”

“With the damage it’ll be a matter of ten pound.”

The swarthy man in evening dress fished out his note-case.

“Here you are, you blackmailing thief.”

“None of your back-chat, or I’ll finish off what this gentleman has
begun,” said the taxi man, pocketing the money.

Until he saw summary justice accomplished, Triona stood in the lee of
the houses, his arm stretched protectingly in front of Olivia. Then he
drew her away.

“I’ll see the lady home. It’s only a few steps.”

“Right, sir. Good night, sir,” said the taxi man.

They moved on. Immediately in the silence of the night came the crisp
exchange of words.

“I’ll give you a pound to take me to Porchester Terrace.”

“And I’d give a pound to see you walk there,” said the driver, already
in his seat.

He threw in the clutch and with a cheery “Good night” passed the
extravagantly encountered pair.

“They say miracles don’t happen, but one has happened now,” said Olivia
breathlessly. “If you hadn’t come out of space——”

“Do tell me something about it,” he asked.

“But don’t you know?”

“You said that profit-merchant had insulted you and that was enough for
me.”

“Oh, my God! I’m so ashamed!” she cried, with a wild, pretty gesture of
her hands. “What will you think of me?”

Mad words rushed through his brain, but before they found utterance he
gripped himself. He had, once more, his hands on the controls.

“What I think of you, Miss Gale, it would be wiser not to say. I should
like to hear what has occurred. But, pardon me,” he said abruptly,
noticing her curious, uneven step, and glancing down instinctively at
her feet, “what has become of your shoe?”

“My slipper—why, of course——” She halted, suddenly aware of the loss.
“I must have left it in the cab. I stuck up my foot and reached for it
and broke the window with the heel. I also think I hit him in the face.”

“It seems as though he was down and out before I came up,” said Triona.

“If you hadn’t I don’t [know] how I should have carried on,” she
confessed.

They walked down the wide, empty street. The moon shone high above them,
the girl in her elegance, the man in his loose grey flannels and soft
felt hat, an incongruous couple, save for their common air of alert
youth. And while they walked she rapidly told her story. She had been to
Percy’s with the usual crowd, Lydia Dawlish her nominal chaperone. The
man, Edwin Mavenna, a city friend of Sydney Rooke, whom she had met a
half a dozen times, had offered to drive her home in his waiting taxi.
Tired, dependent for transport on Rooke and Lydia, who desired a further
hour of the night club’s dismal jocundity, and angry with Bobby Quinton,
who seemed to think that her ear had no other function than to listen to
tales of sentimenti-financial woe, she had accepted. Half-way home she
had begun to regret; three-quarters of the way she had been frightened.
As they turned into Victoria Street she had managed to free her arm and
wield the victorious slipper.

“I’ll never go to that abominable place again as long as I live,” she
cried.

“I should, if I were you,” he said quietly.

“Why?”

“I’d go once or twice, at any rate. To show yourself independent of it.
To prove to yourself that you’re not frightened of it.”

“But I am frightened of it. On the outside it’s as respectable as Medlow
Parish Church on Sunday. But below the surface there’s all sorts of
hideousness—and I’m frightened.”

“You’re not,” said he. “Things may startle you, infuriate you, put you
off your equilibrium; but they don’t frighten you. They didn’t this
evening. I’ve seen too many people frightened in my time not to know.
You’re not that sort.”

They had reached the door of the Mansions. She smiled at him, her gaiety
returning.

“You’re as comforting and consoling a Knight Errant as one could wish to
meet. The damsel in distress is greatly beholden to you. But how
the—whatever you like—you managed to time the rescue is beyond my
comprehension.”

“The stars guided me,” he replied, with an upward sweep of the hand.
“Mortals have striven to comprehend them for thousands of years—but
without success. I started out to wander about this great city—I often
do for hours—I’m a born wanderer—with the vagabond’s aimlessness and
trust in chance, or in the stars—and this time the stars brought me
where it was decreed that I should be.”

While he was speaking she had opened the door with her latchkey and now
stood, shimmering white in the gloom of the entrance. She held out her
hand.

“I’m afraid I’ve been too much occupied in trying not to seem frightened
and silly to thank you decently for what you’ve done. But I am grateful.
You don’t know how grateful. I’ll have to tell you some other time.”

“To-morrow?” he asked eagerly.

She hesitated for a moment. “Yes, to-morrow,” she replied softly. “I
shall be in all day. Goodnight.”

After the swift handshake the door closed on the enraptured young man,
and the hard, characterless street, down which he seemed to dance,
became transformed into a moonlit glade of fairyland.

It was four o’clock in the morning when he entered his back-bedroom at
the Vanloo Hotel. But he did not sleep. He had no desire for
sleep—youth resenting the veil drawn across a consciousness so
exquisitely alive. Sleep, when the stars in their courses were fighting
for him? Impossible, preposterous! Let him rather live, again and again,
over the night’s crowded adventure. Every detail of it set his pulses
throbbing. The mere glorious first recognition of her was the thrill of
a lifetime. He constructed and reconstructed the immortal picture. The
moonlit, silent street, its high, decorous buildings marked by the
feeble gas lamps melting into an indeterminate vanishing point. The
clear-cut scene. The taxi-cab. The three human figures. The stunted
driver. The massive, dark man, in silk hat which reflected the
moonlight, in black overcoat thrown open, revealing a patch of white
shirt and waistcoat; the slender, quivering, white form draped in white
fur, white gossamer, white what-not, crowned with dark glory of eyes and
hair. The masculine in him exulted in his physical strength and
skill—in the clean, straight, elementary yet scientific left-hander
that got the hulking swine between the eyes and sent him reeling and
sprawling and asking for no more punishment. And then—oh, it was a
great thing to command, to impose his will. To walk in triumph off with
the wonderful lady of his dreams. To feel, as she thanked him, that here
was something definite that he had done for her, something with a touch
of the romantic, the heroic, which, in its trivial way, justified belief
in the incidents of his adventurous career which he had so modestly, yet
so vividly described in the book that had brought him fame.

On this point of justification he was peculiarly sensitive. Various
Englishmen, soldiers sent out on secret missions to the fringes of the
areas of his activities, had questioned many of his statements, both in
the book and in descriptive articles which he had written for newspapers
and other periodicals, and asked for proofs. And he had replied, most
cogently, that the sphere of the Russian Secret Service in which he was
employed was, of necessity, beyond the ken of the secret service of any
other Power in Europe, and that official proofs were lost in the social
and political disintegration of Russia. One man, a great man, speaking
with unquestionable authority, silenced the horde of cavillers as far as
events prior to 1917 were concerned. But there were still some who
barked annoyingly at his heels. Proofs, of course, he had none to give.
How can a man give proofs when he is cast up, practically naked, on the
coast of England? He must be believed or not. And it was the haunting
terror of this sensitive boy of genius, whose face and eyes bore the
ineffaceable marks of suffering, that he should lose the credit which he
had gained.

At all hazards he must allow no doubts to arise in the mind of Olivia.
To fight them down he would do all manner of extravagant things. He
regretted the pusillanimous tameness of his late opponent. If the man
had only picked himself up and given battle! If only there had been half
a dozen abductors or insulters instead of one! His spirits (at seven
o’clock) sank at the logical conclusion that the conventional conditions
of post-war civilized life afforded a meagre probability of the
recurrence of such another opportunity. He had the temperament of those
whose hunger is only whetted by triumph, to whom attainment only gives
vision of new heights. When, after tossing sleepless in his bed, he rose
and dressed at nine, he had decided that, in knocking down a mere mass
of unresisting flesh, he had played a part almost inglorious, such as
any stay-at-home _embusqué_ could have played. By not one jot or tittle
did his act advance the credibility of his story. And on his story alone
could he found his hopes of finding favour in her marvellous eyes. Of
the touch of genius that inspired his literary work he thought little.
At this stage of his career he was filled with an incredulous wonder at
his possession of a knack which converted a page of scribble into a
cheque upon a bank. His writing meant money. Not money, wealth, on the
grand scale; but money to keep him as a modest gentleman on the social
grade to which he had attained, and to save him from the detested livery
of the chauffeur. The story which he was telling in the new book was but
a means to this end. The story which he had told was life itself. Nay,
now it was more: it was love itself; it was a girl who was more than
life.

He called at the Victoria Street flat at twelve o’clock. The austere
Myra looked on him disapprovingly. Tea-time was the visiting time for
stray young men, and even then she conveyed to them the impression that
she let them in on sufferance.

“What name?” she asked.

“Mr. Triona.”

“Miss Gale is in, sir,” she admitted grudgingly, having received
explicit orders from Olivia, “but she is dressing and I don’t know
whether she can see you.”

“Will you tell Miss Gale that I am entirely at her service, and if it’s
inconvenient for her to see me now I’ll call later.”

Myra left him standing in the little vestibule and gave the message to
Olivia, who, fully dressed, was polishing her nails in her bedroom.

“You’re the most impossible woman on earth,” Olivia declared, turning on
her. “Is that the way you would treat a man who had delivered you from a
dragon?”

“I don’t hold with men and I don’t hold with dragons,” replied Myra
unmoved. “The next time you’ll be wanting me to fall over a dragon who
has delivered you from a man!”

Olivia scarcely listened to the retort. She flew out and carried the
waiting Triona into the sitting-room.

“I’m so sorry. My maid’s a terror. She bites and doesn’t bark. But I
guarantee her non-venomous. How good of you to come so early.”

“I was anxious,” said Triona.

“About what?”

“Last night must have been a shock.”

“Of course it was,” she laughed; “but not enough to keep me all day long
in fainting fits with doctors and smelling-bottles.”

“I hope you slept all right.”

“No,” she replied frankly. “That I didn’t do. The adventure was a bit
too exciting. Besides——”

“Besides what?”

“It came into my head to make up my moral balance sheet. Figures of
arithmetic always send me to sleep; but figures of—well, of that kind
of thing, don’t you know—keep me broad awake.”

Olivia’s dark, eager face was of the kind that shows the traces of
fatigue in faint shadows under the eyes. He swiftly noted them and cried
out:

“You’re dead tired. It’s damnable.” He rose, suddenly angry. “You ought
to go to bed at once. Your maid was right. I had no business to come at
this hour and disturb you.”

“If you hadn’t come,” said Olivia, inwardly glowing at the tribute paid
by the indignant youth, “I should have imagined that you looked on last
night’s affair as a trumpery incident in the day’s work and went to bed
and forgot all about it.”

“That’s impossible,” said he. “I, too, haven’t slept a wink.”

She met and held his eyes longer than she, or anyone else, had held
them. Then, half angrily, she felt her cheeks grow hot and red.

“For you, who have faced death a hundred times, last night, as I’ve just
said, must be even dull. What was it to the night when you—you
know—the sentry—when you were unarmed and you fought with him and you
killed him with his own bayonet?”

He snapped his fingers and smiled. “That was unimportant. Whether I
lived or died didn’t matter to anybody. It didn’t matter much to me. It
was sheer animal instinct. But last night it was you. And that makes a
universe of difference.”

Olivia rose, and, with a “You’re not smoking,” offered him a box of
cigarettes.

“Yes,” she said, when he had lighted it, with fingers trembling ever so
slightly as they held the match, “I suppose a woman does make a
difference. We’re always in the way, somehow. Women and children first.
Why they don’t throw us overboard at once and let the really useful
people save themselves, I could never make out.”

His air of dismay was that of a devotee listening to a saint blaspheme.
Her laughter rippled, music to his ears.

“Do you know what I should like to do? Get out of London for a few hours
and fill my lungs with air. Richmond Park, for instance.”

“I, too.” He sighed. “If only I had a car!”

“There are such things as motor-buses.”

He sprang to delighted feet. His divinity on a bus top! It was like the
Paphian goddess condescending from her dove-drawn chariot to the joggle
of a four-wheeler cab.

“Would you really go on one?”

She would. She would start forthwith. The time only to put on a hat. She
left him to his heart-beats of happiness, presently to re-appear,
hatted, gloved, and smiling.

“You’re quite sure you would like to come? Your work?”

“My work needs the open air as much as I do,” said he.

They went forth, boy and girl on a jaunt, and side by side on the top of
the omnibus they gave themselves up to the laughter of the pure
sunshine. At Richmond they lunched, for youth must be fed, and
afterwards went through the streets of the old town, and stood on the
bridge watching the exquisite curve of the river embosomed in the very
newest of new greenery, and let its loveliness sink into their hearts.
Then they wandered deep into the Park and found a tree from beneath
which they could see the deer browsing in the shade; and there they sat,
happy in their freedom and isolation. What they said, most of the time,
was no great matter. Of the two, perhaps she talked the more; for he had
said:

“I am so tired of talking about myself. I have been obliged to, so that
it has become a professional habit. And what there is to be known about
me, you know. But you—you who have lived such a different life from
mine—I know so little of you. In fact, I’ve known nothing of English
women such as you. You’re a mystery. Tell me about yourself.”

So she had begun:

“Well, I was born—I shan’t tell you the year—of poor but honest
parents——”

And then, led on by his eager sympathy and his intimate knowledge of her
home, she had abandoned the jesting note and talked simply and frankly
of her secluded and eventless life. With feminine guile, and with last
night’s newborn mistrust of men, she set a little trap.

“Did you ever go into my mother’s room?”

“I don’t think so. Perhaps that was the one—the best bedroom—which
Olifant always kept locked.”

She felt ashamed of her unworthy suspicion; glad at the loyal keeping of
a promise, to the extent of not allowing a visitor even a peep inside
the forbidden chamber.

“I think Blaise Olifant is one of the finest types England breeds,” she
said warmly.

There was a touch of jealous fear in his swift glance; but he replied
with equal warmth:

“You needn’t tell me that. Brave, modest, of sensitive honour—Ah! A man
with a mind so cultivated that he seems to know nothing until you talk
with him, and then you find that he knows everything. I love him.”

“I’m glad to hear you say that.”

“Why? Do you admire him so much?”

“It isn’t that,” she parried. “It’s on your account. One man’s generous
praise of another does one’s heart good.” She threw out her arms as
though to embrace the rolling park of infinite sward and majestic trees.
“I love big things,” she said.

Whereupon Alexis Triona thanked his stars for having led him along the
true path.

Who can say that, in after years, these twain, when they shall have
grown old and have gone through whatever furnaces Fate—either personal
destiny or the Fate of Social Institutions—may prepare for them, will
not retain imperishable memories of the idyll of that sweet spring day?
There they sat, youth spiritually communing with youth; the girl urged
by feminine instinct to love him for the dangers he had passed; the
young man aflame with her beauty, her charm, her dryad elusiveness.
Here, for him, was yet another aspect of her, free, unseizable in the
woodland setting. And for her, another aspect of him, the simple,
clean-cut Englishman, divested of vague and disquieting Russian
citizenship, the perfect companion, responsive to every chord struck by
the spirit of the magic afternoon. In the years to come, who can say
that they will not remember this sweet and delicate adventure of their
souls creeping forth in trembling reconnaissance one of the other?
Perhaps it will be a more precious memory to the woman than to the man.
Men do not lay things up in lavender as women do.

If he had spoken, declared his passion in lover’s set terms, perhaps her
heart might have been caught by the glamour of it all, and she might
have surrendered to his kisses, and they might have journeyed back to
London in a state of unreprehensible yet commonplace beatitude. And the
memory would possibly have been marked by a white stone rising stark in
an airless distance. But he did not speak, held back by a rare reverence
of her maidenhood and her perfect trust; and in her heart flowered
gratitude for his sensitiveness to environment. So easy for a maladroit
touch to mar the perfection of an exquisite hour of blue mist and
mystery. So, again, who knows but that in the years to come the memory
will be marked by a fragrance, a shimmer of leaves, a haze over green
sward, incorporated impalpably with the dear ghost of an immortal day?

They returned on the top of the omnibus, rather late, and on the way
they spoke little. Now and then he glanced sideways at her and met her
eyes and caught her smile, and felt content. At the terminus of the
omnibus route, in the raging, busy precincts of the stations of
Victoria, they alighted. He walked with her to her door in Victoria
Street.

“Your words have been singing in my ears,” said he: “‘I love big
things.’ To me, to-day has seemed a big thing.”

“And I’ve loved it,” she replied.

“True?”

“True.”

She sped up to her room somewhat dazed, conscious of need to keep her
balance. So much had happened in the last four-and-twenty hours. The
shudder of the night had still horrified her flesh when she drew the
young man out into the wide daylight and the open air; and now it had
passed away, as though it had never been, and a new quivering of youth,
taking its place, ran like laughter through her bodily frame and her
heart and her mind.

“H’m. Your outing seems to have done you good,” said the impassive Myra,
letting her in.

“My first day’s escape from a fœtid prison,” she said.

“I suppose you know what you’re talking about,” said Myra.

Olivia laughed and threw her arm round Myra’s lean shoulders.

“Of course I do.”

“He ain’t much to look at.”

Olivia, flushing, turned on her.

“I never knew a more abominable woman.”

“Then you’re lucky,” retorted Myra, and faded away into her kitchen.

Olivia, mirthful, uplifted, danced, as it were, into the sitting-room
and began to pull off her gloves. Suddenly her glance fell on a letter
lying on her writing table. She frowned slightly as she opened it, and
as she read the frown grew deeper. It was from Bobby Quinton. What his
dearest of dear ladies would think of him he left on the joint knees of
the gods and of his dearest lady—but—but the wolves were at his heels.
He had thrown them all that he possessed—fur coat, watch and chain,
diamond studs, and, having gulped them all, they were still in fierce
pursuit. In a fortnight would he have ample funds to satisfy them. But
now he was at bay. He apologized for the mixture of metaphor. But still,
there he was _aux abois_. Fifty pounds, just for a fortnight. Could the
dearest of dear ladies see her way——-?

She went to her desk and wrote out a cheque which she enclosed in an
envelope. To save her soul alive she could not have written Bobby
Quinton an accompanying line.


                               CHAPTER IX

HERE, all in a rush of twenty-four hours, was a glut of incident for a
young woman out for adventure. Triona had only made his effect on the
romantically feminine within Olivia by his triumphant rescue. As to that
he need have no misgivings. So once did Andromeda see young Perseus,
calm and assured, deliver her from the monster. Triona’s felling of
Mavenna appealed to the lingering savage woman fiercely conscious of
wrong avenged; but his immediate and careless mastery of the situation
struck civilized chords. She could see him dominating the sheepskin-clad
tribe in the Urals (see _Through Blood and Snow_) until he established
their independence in their mountain fastness. She could see him,
masterful, resourceful, escaping from the Bolshevik prison and making
his resistless way across a hostile continent. She could also
appreciate, after this wonder-day at Richmond, the suppleness of his
simple charm which won him food and shelter where food scarcely existed
and shelter to a stranger was a matter of shooting or a bashing in of
heads.

As for Mavenna, her flesh still shuddered at the memory of those few
moments of insult. What he said she could scarcely remember. The
inextricable clutch of his great arms around her body and the detestable
kisses eclipsed mere words. Unwittingly his hug had compressed her
throat so that she could not scream. There had been nothing for it but
the slipper unhooked by the free arm, and the doughty heel. Had she won
through alone to her room, she would have collapsed—so she assured
herself—from sickening horror. But the Deliverer had been there, as in
a legend of Greece or Broceliande, and had saved her from the madness of
the nymph terror stricken by Satyrs. The two extravagances had, in a
way, counteracted each other, setting her, by the morning, in a normal
equilibrium. She had tried to explain the phenomenon by referring to her
having spent the night in striking a moral balance-sheet. And then had
come the day, the wonderful day, in which the Deliverer had proved
himself the perfect, gentle Knight. Can it be wondered that her brain
swam with him?

She went the next morning to Lydia’s hat shop, and, in the little room
which Sydney Brooke had called her cubby hole, a nine-foot-square
boudoir office, reeking with Lydia’s scent and with Heaven knows what
scandals and vulgarities and vanities of post-war London, she poured out
her tale of outrage. After listening with indulgent patience, Lydia
remarked judicially:

“I told you, my dear child, when you came to London, that the first
lesson you had to learn was to take care of yourself.”

Olivia flashed. She had taken care of herself well enough. But that
brute Mavenna—what about him?

“Everybody knows Mavenna,” replied Lydia. “No girl in her senses would
have trusted herself alone with him.”

“And, with that reputation, he’s a friend of yours and Sydney’s?”

Lydia shrugged her plump shoulders.

“Really, my dear, if one exacted certificates of lamb-like innocence,
signed by a high celestial official, before you admitted anyone into the
circle of your acquaintance, you might as well go and live on a desert
island.”

“But this man’s a beast and you’ve known it all along!” cried Olivia.

“Only in one way.”

“But—my God! Isn’t that enough?” Olivia stood, racked with disgust and
amazement, over her mild-eyed, philosophic friend. “What would you have
done if you had been in my place?”

“I could never have been in your place,” said Lydia. “I should have been
too wise.”

“How?”

“The knowledge of men, my dear, is the beginning of wisdom.”

“And I ought to have known?”

“Of course. At any rate, you’ll know in the future.”

“I shall. You may be dead certain I shall,” declared Olivia, in her
anger and excitement seizing a puckered and pleated cushion from the
divan by which she stood. “And if even I—−-”

“Don’t, darling; you’ll tear it,” said Lydia calmly.

Olivia heaved the cushion back impatiently.

“What I want to know is this. Are you and Sydney going to remain friends
with Mavenna?”

“I’m afraid we’ll have to,” replied Lydia. “Mavenna and Sydney are in
all sorts of big things together.”

“Well, when next you see him, Lydia, look well into his face and ask him
what he thinks of the heel of my slipper and Mr. Triona’s fist. He’s not
only a beast. He’s a worm. When I think of him picking himself up, after
being knocked down by a man half his size——” She laughed a bit
hysterically. “Oh—the creature is outside the pale!”

Lydia shook her fair head. “I’m sorry for you, my dear. But he’s inside
all right.”

“Then I’m not going to be inside with him!” cried Olivia.

And, like a little dark dust storm, she swirled out of the office and,
through the shop, into the freedom and spaciousness of the streets. And
that, for Olivia, was the end of night clubs and dancing as a serious
aim in life, and a host of other vanities.

A few mornings afterwards Lydia sailed into the flat and greeted Olivia
as though nothing had happened. She seemed to base her philosophy of
life on obliteration of the past, yesterday being as dead as a winter’s
day of sixty years ago. Would Olivia lunch with Sydney and herself at
some riverside club? Sydney, having collected Mauregard, would be
calling for them with the car. The day was fine and warm; the prospect
of the cool lawn reaching down to the plashing river allured, and she
liked Mauregard. Besides, she had begun to take a humorous view of
Lydia. She consented. Lydia began to talk of her wedding, fixed for the
middle of July, of the clothes that she had and the clothes that she
hadn’t—the ratio of the former to the latter being that of a loin-cloth
to the stock of Selfridge’s. When she was serious minded, Lydia always
expressed herself in terms of raiment.

“And you’ll have to get some things, too, as you’re going to be
bridesmaid.”

“Am I?” asked Olivia, this being the first she had heard of it. “And
who’s going to be best man—Mavenna?”

Lydia looked aghast. So might a band of primitive Christians have
received a suggestion of inviting the ghost of Pontius Pilate to a
commemorative supper.

“My dear child, you don’t suppose we’re going to ask that horror to the
wedding?”

“The other day,” Olivia remarked drily, “I understood that you and
Sydney loved him dearly.”

Lydia sighed. “I’m beginning to believe that you’ll never understand
anything.”

So the breach, if breach there were, was healed. Olivia, relating the
matter to Triona at their next meeting, qualified Lydia’s attitude as
one of callous magnanimity.

Meanwhile her intimacy with the young man began to ripen.

One evening Janet Philimore invited her to dine at the Russian circle of
a great womans’ club, which was entertaining Triona at dinner. This was
the first time she had seen him in his character of modest lion; the
first time, too, she had been in a company of women groping, however
clumsily, after ideals in unsyncopated time. The thin girl next to her,
pretty enough, thought Olivia, if only she had used a powder puff to
mitigate the over-assertiveness of a greasy skin, and had given less the
impression of having let out her hair to a bird for nesting purposes,
and had only seized the vital importance of colour—the untrue greeny
daffodil of her frock not being the best for a sallow complexion—the
girl next to her, Agnes Blenkiron, started a hectic conversation by
enquiring what she was going to do in Baby Week. The more ignorant
Olivia professed herself to be of babies and their antecedents,
especially the latter, the more indignantly explicit became Miss
Blenkiron. Olivia listened until she had creepy sensations around the
roots of her hair and put up an instinctive hand to assure herself that
it was not standing on end. Miss Blenkiron talked feminist physiology,
psychology, sociological therapeutics, until Olivia’s brain reeled. Over
and over again she tried to turn to her hostess, who fortunately had a
pleasant male and middle-aged neighbour, but the fair lady, without
mercy, had her in thrall. She learned that all the two or three thousand
members of the club were instinct with these theories and their aims.
She struggled to free herself from the spell.

“I thought we were here to talk about Russia,” she ventured.

“But we are talking about Russia.” Miss Blenkiron shed on her the
lambency of her pale blue eyes. “The future of the human race lies in
the hands of the millions of Russian babies lying in the bodies of
millions of Russian women just waiting to be born.”

A flash of the devil saved Olivia from madness.

“That’s a gigantic conception,” she said.

“It is,” Miss Blenkiron agreed, unhumorously, and continued her work of
propaganda, so that by the time the speeches began Olivia found herself
committed to the strenuous toil of a lifetime as a member of she knew
not what societies. The only clear memory she retained was that of a tea
engagement some Sunday in a North London garden city where Miss
Blenkiron and her brother frugally entertained the advanced thinkers of
the day.

In spite of the sense of release from something vampiric, when the
speeches hushed general conversation, she recognized that the strange
talk had been revealing and stimulating, and she brought a quickened
intelligence to the comprehension of the gathering. To all these women
the present state of the upheaved world was of vast significance. In
Lydia’s galley no one cared a pin about it, save Sydney Rooke, who
cursed it for its interference with his income. But here, as was clearly
conveyed in the opening remarks of the chairwoman, a novelist of
distinction, every one was intellectually concerned with its infinite
complexity of aspect. To them, the guest of the evening, emerging as he
had done from the dizzying profundities of the whirlpool, was a figure
of uncanny interest.

“It’s the first-hand knowledge of men like him that is vital,” Miss
Blenkiron whispered when the chairwoman sat down. “I should so much like
to meet him.”

“Would you?” said Olivia. “That’s easily managed. He’s a great friend of
mine.”

And she was subridently conscious of having acquired vast and sudden
merit in her neighbour’s eyes.

Triona pleased her beyond expectation. The function, so ordinary to
public-dinner-going London, was new to her. She magnified the strain
that commonplace, even though sincere, adulation could put upon a guest
of honour. She felt a twinge of apprehension when he stood up, in his
loose boyish way, and brushing his brown hair from his temples, began to
speak. But in a moment or two all such feelings vanished. He spoke to
this assembly of a hundred, mostly women, much as, in moments of
enthusiasm, he would speak to her. And, indeed, often catching her eye,
he did speak to her, subtly and flatteringly bringing her to his side.
Her heart beat a bit faster when, glancing around and seeing every one
hanging on his words, she realized that she alone, of all this little
multitude, held a golden key to the mystery of the real man. There he
talked, with the familiar sway of the shoulders, and, when seeking for a
phrase, with the nervous plucking of his lips; talked in his nervous,
picturesque fashion, now and then with a touch of the poet, consistently
modest, only alluding to personal experience to illustrate a point or to
give verisimilitude to a jest. He developed his feminist theme
logically, dramatically, proving beyond argument that the future of
civilization lay in the hands of the women of the civilized world.

He had a great success. Woman, although she knows it perfectly well,
loves to be told what she wants and the way to get it: she will never
follow the way, of course, having a tortuous, thorny, and enticing way
of her own; but that doesn’t matter. The principle, the end, that is the
thing: it justifies any amazing means. He sat down amid enthusiastic
applause. Flushed, he sought Olivia’s distant gaze and smiled. Then she
felt, thrillingly, that he had been speaking for her, for her alone, and
her eyes brightened and flashed him a proud message.

She met him a while later in the thronged drawing-room of the club,
rather a shy and embarrassed young man, heading a distinct course toward
her through a swarm of kind yet predatory ladies. She admired the simple
craftsmanship of his approach.

“How are you going to get home?” he asked.

The adorable carelessness of twenty shrugged its shoulders.

“I don’t know. The Lord will provide.”

“If you can’t find a taxi, will you walk?”

The question implied a hope, so obvious that she laughed gaily.

“There are buses also and tubes.”

“In which you can’t travel alone at this time of night.”

She scoffed: “Oh, can’t I?” But his manifest fear that she should
encounter satyrs in train or omnibus pleased her greatly.

“Father’s dining at his club close by and is calling for me. He will see
that you get home safely,” said Janet Philimore.

“It’s miles out of your way, dear,” said Olivia. “I’ll put myself in the
hands of Mr. Triona.”

So, taxis being unfindable, they walked together through the warm London
night to Victoria Street. It was then that he spoke of his work, the
novel just completed. Of all opinions on earth, hers was the one he most
valued. If only he could read it to her and have the priceless benefit
of her judgment. Secretly flattered, she modestly depreciated, however,
her critical powers. He persisted, attributing to her unsuspected
qualities of artistic perception. At last, not reluctantly, she yielded.
He could begin the next evening.

The reading took some days. Olivia, new to creative work, marvelled
exceedingly at the magic of the artist’s invention. The personages of
the drama, imaginary he said, lived as real beings. She regarded their
creation as uncanny.

“But how do you know she felt like that?”

He shrugged his shoulders and smiled. “I can’t conceive her feeling
otherwise.”

Yet, for all her wonder, she brought her swift intelligence to the task
of criticism. Not since her mother’s illness had she taken anything so
seriously. She lived in the book, walking meanwhile through an unreal
world. Her golden words, on the other hand, the young man captured
eagerly and set down in the margin of the manuscript. Half-way through
the reading, they were on terms of Christian names. Minds so absorbed in
an artistic pursuit grew impatient of absurd formalities of address.
They slipped almost imperceptibly into the Olivia and Alexis habit. At
the end they pulled themselves up rather sharply, with blank looks at an
immediate future bereft of common interest.

“I’ll have to begin another, right away, so that you can be with me from
the very start,” he said.

“Have you an idea?”

“Not yet.”

“When will you have one?”

He didn’t know. What man spent with the creative effort of a novel has
the vitality to beget another right away? He feels that the very last
drop of all that he has known and suffered and enjoyed has been used to
the making of the book. For the making of another nothing is left.

“I suppose I’ll have to lie fallow for a week or so,” said the young
optimist.

“And as soon as things begin to sprout you’ll let me know?” asked
Olivia, forgetful that before harvest there must be seed time.

He promised; went home and cudgelled tired brains; also cudgelled, for
different reasons, an untired and restless soul.

Let him make good, not ephemerally as the picturesque narrator of
personal adventure, but definitely, with this novel as the creative
artist—the fervent passion of his life—and he would establish himself
in her eyes, in her mind, in her heart; so that treading solid ground,
he could say to her: “This is what I am, and for what I am, take me. All
that has gone before was but a crude foundation. I had to take such
rubbish and rubble as I could find to hand.” But until then, let him
regard her as a divinity beyond his reach, rendering her service and
worship, but forbearing to soil her white robe with a touch as yet
unhallowed.

Many a time, they could have read no more that day. Just one swift
movement, glance or cry on the part of the man, and the pulses of youth
would have throbbed wildly together. He knew it. The knowledge was at
once his Heaven and his Hell. A less sensitive human being would not
have appreciated the quivering and vital equipoise. Many a time he
parted from her with the farewell of comradely intimacy on his lips, and
when the lift had deposited him on the street level his heart had been
like lead and his legs as water, so that he stumbled out into the
lamp-lit dark of night like a paralytic or a drunken man.

And that which was good in him warred fiercely against temptations more
sordid. As far as he knew, she was a woman of fortune. So did her dress,
her habit of life, her old comfort-filled Medlow home, proclaim her. Of
her social standing as the daughter of Stephen Gale who bawled out bids
for yelts and rams in the Medlow market place, he knew or understood
very little. Her fortune was a fact. His own, the few hundreds which he
had gained by _Through Blood and Snow_, was rapidly disappearing. The
failure of the new book meant starvation or reversion to Cherbury Mews.
Married to a woman with money he could snap his fingers at crust or
livery. . . . For the time he conquered.

The end of the reading coincided more or less with Midsummer
quarter-day. Bills from every kind of coverer or adorner of the feminine
human frame fell upon her like a shower of autumn leaves. She sat at her
small writing desk, jotted down the amounts, and added them up with a
much sucked pencil point. The total was incredible. With fear at her
heart she rushed round to her bank for a note of her balance. It had
woefully decreased since January. Payment of all these bills would
deplete it still more woefully. The rent of “The Towers” and the
diminishing income on the deposit account were trivial items set against
her expenditure. She summoned Myra.

“We’re heading for bankruptcy.”

“Any fool could see that,” said Myra.

“What are we going to do?”

“Live like Christians instead of heathens,” replied Myra. “If you would
come to Chapel with me one Sunday night you could be taught how.”

Here Myra failed. She belonged to a Primitive Non-Conformist Communion
whose austere creed and drab ceremonial had furnished occasion for
Olivia’s teasing wit since childhood. Heathendom, ever divorced from
Lydian pleasures, presented infinitely more reasons for existence than
Myra’s Calvinism.

“It seems funny that a dear old thing like you can revel in the idea of
Eternal Punishment.”

“I haven’t got much else to revel in, have I?” said Myra grimly.

“I suppose that’s true,” said Olivia thoughtfully. “But it isn’t my
fault, is it? If you had wanted to revel, mother and I would have been
the last people to prevent you. Why not begin now? Go and have a debauch
at the pictures.”

“You began by talking of bankruptcy,” said Myra.

“And you prescribed little Bethel. I’d sooner go broke.”

“You’ll have your own way, as usual,” said Myra.

“And if I go broke, what’ll you do?” asked Olivia, unregenerately
enjoying the conversation.

“I suppose I’ll have to put you together again,” replied Myra, with no
sign of emotion on her angular, withered face.

Olivia leaped from her chair.

“I’m a beast.”

“That can’t be,” said Myra, “seeing that it was I as brought you up.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

That was the end of the argument. Olivia recognized in Myra every useful
quality save that of the financier. She dismissed Myra from her
counsels. But the state of her budget cost her a sleepless night or two.
At the present rate of expenditure a couple of years would see her
penniless. For the first time since her emancipation from Medlow fetters
she had the feeling of signing her own death-warrant on every cheque.
Heroic resolves were born of these days of depression.

As a climax to her worries, came Bobby Quinton, one afternoon. What had
he done to offend his dearest of ladies? Why had she stopped the dancing
lessons? Why did Percy’s see her no more?

“I’m fed up with Percy’s and the whole gang,” said Olivia.

“Not including me, surely?” cried the young man, with a dog’s appeal in
his melting brown eyes.

She was kind. At first, she had not the heart to pack him off to the
froth and scum of social life to which he belonged. He had the charm of
unsuccessful youth so pathetic in woman’s eyes.

“If you are,” said he, “I’m done for. I’ve no one to look to but you, in
the wide world.”

Here was responsibility for the safety of a human soul. Olivia gave him
sound advice, repeating many an old argument and feeling enjoyably
maternal. But when Bobby grew hysterical, and, with mutation of sex,
quoted the Indian Love Lyrics and professed himself prepared to die
beneath her chariot wheels, and threatened to do so if she disregarded
his burning passion, she admonished him after the manner of
twentieth-century maidenhood.

“My good Bobby, don’t be an ass.”

But Bobby persisted in being an ass, with the zeal of the dement. He
became the fervent lover of the cinquecento Bandello—and, with his dark
eyes and hair, looked the part. Imploring he knelt at the feet of the
divinity.

“That’s all very well, my dear boy,” said Olivia, unmoved by his
rhapsody, “all very nice and all very beautiful. But what do you want me
to do?”

Of course he wanted her to marry him, there and then: to raise him from
the Hell he was in to the Heaven where she had her pure habitation. With
her he could do great things. He guaranteed splendid achievements.

“Before a woman marries a man,” said Olivia, “she rather wants an
achievement or two on account.”

“Then you don’t love me, you don’t trust me?” exclaimed the infatuated
young man, ruffling his sleek black hair.

“I can’t say that I do,” replied Olivia, growing weary. “If you tell me
what sort of fascination you possess, I’ll give it due consideration.”

“Then I may as well go away and blow my brains out,” he cried
tragically.

“You might better go and use such brains as you have in doing a man’s
work,” retorted Olivia.

He reproached her mournfully.

“How unkind you are.”

“If you came here as a window-cleaner or a lift porter I might be
kinder. You’re quite a nice boy,” she went on after a pause, “otherwise
I shouldn’t have anything to do with you. But you haven’t begun to learn
the elements of life. You’re utterly devoid of the sense of duty or
responsibility. Like the criminal, you know. Oh, don’t get angry. I’m
talking to you for your good. Pretending to teach idle women worthless
dancing isn’t a career for a man. It’s contemptible. Every
man—especially nowadays—ought to pull his weight in the world. The
war’s not over. The real war is only just beginning. Instead of pulling
your weight you think it’s your right to sit on a cushion, a
passenger—or a Pekie dog—and let other people pull you.”

“You don’t understand——”

“Oh, yes I do. One has to live, and at first we take any old means to
hand. But you’ve been going on at this for a couple of years and haven’t
tried to get out of it. You like it, Bobby——”

“I loathe it.”

“You don’t,” she went on remorselessly, with her newly acquired
knowledge of what a man’s life could be. “All you loathe is the
work—especially when it doesn’t bring you in as much money as you want.
You hate work.”

Resentment gradually growing out of amusement at his presumptuous
proposal had wrought her to a pitch of virtuous indignation. Here was
this young man, of cultivated manners, intelligent, able-bodied,
attractive, rejecting any kind of mission in existence, and——

“Look here, Bobby,” she said, rising from her chair by the tea-table and
dominating him with a little gesture, “don’t get up. You sit there.
You’ve asked me to marry you, because you think I’m rich. Hold your
tongue,” she flashed, as he was about to speak. “I’ll take all the love
and that sort of thing for granted. But if I was poor you wouldn’t have
thought of it. At the back of your mind you imagine that if I married
you, we could lead a life of Percy’s and the Savoy and Monte Carlo and
the South Sea Islands, and you needn’t do another stroke of work all
your life long.”

He leaned forward in his chair protesting eagerly that it wasn’t true.
He would marry her to-morrow were she penniless. She had his salvation
soul and body in her hands. He hungered for work; but the coils of his
present life had a strangle-hold on him. Suddenly he rose and advanced a
step towards her.

“Listen, Olivia. If you won’t marry me, will you help me in other ways?
I’m desperate. You think you know something about the world. But you
don’t. I’m up against it. It may mean prison. For the love of God lend
me a couple of hundred pounds.”

The ugly word prison sent a stab through her heart; but immediately
afterwards the common-sense of her Gale ancestry told her either that he
was lying, or, if it were true, that he deserved it. She asked coldly:

“What have you been doing?”

“I can’t tell you,” he said. “You must trust me.”

“But I don’t and that is why I can’t lend you two hundred pounds.”

“You refuse?”

His soft voice became a snarl and his lip curled unpleasantly back
beneath the little silky moustache.

“Of course I do.”

“I don’t know how you dare, after all the encouragement you’ve given
me.”

She stared at him aghast. “Encouragement?”

“Yes. Didn’t you make me dance attendance on you at Brighton? Haven’t
you brought me here over and over again? You’ve behaved damnably to me.
You’ve made me waste my time. I’ve turned other women who would have
only been too glad——”

In horror, she flew to the door and threw it open.

“Go,” she said.

And speeding across the hall she threw open the flat door.

“Go,” she said again.

She crossed the landing and rang the lift bell and returned to the hall,
where he met her and threw himself on his knees and looked up at her
with wild, hunted eyes.

“Forgive me, Olivia. For God’s sake forgive me. I was mad. I didn’t know
what I was saying. Shut that door and I’ll tell you everything.”

But Olivia passed him by into the sitting-room, and stood with her back
against the door until she heard the clash of the lift gates and the
retreating footsteps of Bobby Quinton.

A short while ago she had nearly quarrelled with Mauregard because, in a
wordy dissertation on the modern young men who lived on women, he
instanced Bobby as possibly coming within the category. Now she knew
that Mauregard was right. She felt sick. Also deadly ashamed of her
superior attitude of well-meant reprimand. She burned with the
consciousness of tongue in cheek while he listened. Well, that was the
end of the Lydian galley.

She did not recover till the next afternoon, when Triona called to take
her to the Blenkirons’ Sunday intellectual symposium in Fielder’s Park.
She welcomed him impulsively with both hands outstretched, as a
justification of her faith in mankind.

“You can’t tell how glad I am to see you.”

“And you,” said he, kissing first one hand and then the other, “can’t
tell how good I think God is to me.”


                               CHAPTER X

HE brought great news. Not only had his publishers thought well of the
novel and offered him good terms, including a substantial advance, but
they professed themselves able to place it serially in England for a
goodly sum. They had also shown him the figures of the half-yearly
returns on American sales of _Through Blood and Snow_ which transcended
his dreams of opulence.

“I had forgotten America,” he said naïvely.

“You’re nothing, if not original,” she laughed. “That’s what I like
about you.”

He insisted on the wild extravagance of a taxi to the garden city. All
that money he declared had gone to his head. He felt the glorious
intoxication of wealth. When they were about to turn off the safe
highway into devious garden-city paths, he said:

“Let us change our minds and go straight on to John o’ Groats.”

“All right. Let us. We’re on the right road.”

He swerved towards her. “Would you? Really?”

She opened her bag and took out her purse.

“I’ve got fifteen and sevenpence. How much have you?”

“About three pounds ten.”

She sighed. “This unromantic taxi man would charge us at least five
pounds to take us there.”

“We can turn back and fill our pockets at the bank.”

“It’s Sunday.”

“I never before realized the blight of the British Sabbath.”

“So we’re condemned to Fielder’s Park.”

“But one of these days we’ll go, you and I together, to John o’
Groats—as far as we can and then——”

“And then?”

“And then we’ll take a ship and sail and sail until we come to the
Fortunate Isles.”

“You’ll let Myra come too?” said Olivia, deliciously anxious to keep to
the playful side of an inevitable road.

“Of course. We’ll find her a husband. The cabin-boy. _Pour mousse un
chérubin._”

“And when we get to the Fortunate Isles, what should we do there?”

“We shall fill our souls with sunlight, so that we could use it when we
came back to our work in this dark and threatening modern world.”

The girl’s heart leapt at the reply.

“I’ll go up to John o’ Groats with you whenever you like,” she said.

But the taxi, at that moment drawing up before the detached toy villa,
whose “Everdene” painted on the green garden gate proclaimed the home of
the Blenkirons, inhibited Triona’s reply.

They found within an unbeautiful assemblage of humans inextricably
mingled with crumbling cake and sloppy cups of tea and cigarette smoke.
Agnes, shining with heat and hospitality, gave them effusive welcome
and, extricating her brother from a distant welter, introduced him to
the newcomers. He was a flabby-faced young man with a back-thatch of
short rufous hair surmounting a bald forehead. By his ears grew little
patches of side whiskers. He wore an old unbuttoned Norfolk jacket and a
red tie in a soft collar without an under pin. He greeted them with an
enveloping clammy hand.

“So good of you to come, Miss Gale. So glad to meet you, Mr. Triona. We
have heard so much about you. You will find us here all very earnest in
our endeavour to find a Solution—for never has human problem been so
intricate that a Solution has not been discovered.”

“What’s the problem?” asked Olivia.

“Why, my dear lady, there’s only one. The Way Out—or, if you have
faith—The Way In.” He caught a lean, thin-bearded man by the arm.
“Dawkins, let me introduce you to Miss Gale. Mr. Dawkins is our
_rapporteur_.”

“You haven’t any tea,” said Dawkins rebukingly, as though bidden to a
marriage feast she had no wedding garment. “Come with me.”

He frayed her a passage through the chattering swarm that over-filled
the little bow-windowed sitting-room and provided her with what seemed
to be the tepid symbols of the brotherhood.

“What did you think of Roger’s article in this week’s _Signal_?”

“Who is Roger, and what is _The Signal_?” Olivia asked simply.

Dawkins stared at her for a second and then, deliberately turning,
wormed his path away.

Olivia’s gasp of surprise was followed by a gurgle of laughter which
shook her lifted cup so that it spilled. The sight of a stained skirt
drew from her a sharp exclamation of dismay. Agnes Blenkiron disengaging
herself from the cluster round the tea-table came to the rescue. What
was the matter? Olivia explained.

“Oh, my dear,” said Agnes, “I ought to have told you. It’s my fault.
Dawkins is such a touchy old thing. Roger, of course, is my
brother—didn’t you know? And _The Signal_ is our weekly. Dawkins is the
editor.”

“I’m awfully sorry,” said Olivia, “but ought I to read _The Signal_?”

“Why, of course,” replied Agnes Blenkiron intensely. “Everybody ought to
read it. It’s the only periodical that matters in London.”

Olivia felt the remorse of those convicted of an unpardonable crime.

“I’ll get a copy to-morrow at the bookstall at Victoria Station.”

Agnes smiled in her haggard way. “My dear, an organ like _The Signal_
doesn’t lie on the bookstalls, like _Comic Cuts_ or _The Fortnightly
Review_. It’s posted to private subscribers, or it’s given away at
meetings.”

“Who pays for the printing of it?” asked the practical Olivia, who had
learned from Triona something of the wild leap in cost of printed
matter.

“Aubrey Dawkins finds the money. He gets it in the City. He has given up
his heart and soul to _The Signal_.”

“I’ve made an enemy for life,” said Olivia penitently.

Miss Blenkiron reassured her. “Oh, no you haven’t. We haven’t time for
enemy making here. Our business is too important.”

Olivia in a maze asked:

“What is your business?”

“Why, my dear child, the Social Revolution. Didn’t you know?”

“Not a bit,” said Olivia.

She learned many astonishing things that afternoon, as she was swayed
about from introduction to introduction among the eagerly disputing
groups. Hitherto she had thought, with little comprehension, of the
world-spread social unrest. Strikes angered her because they interfered
with necessary reconstruction and only set the working classes in a
vicious circle chasing high wages and being chased in their turn by high
prices. At other demands she shuddered, dimly dreading the advent of
Bolshevism. And there she left it. She had imagined that revolutionary
doctrines were preached to factory hands either secretly by rat-faced
agents, or by brass-throated, bull-necked demagogues. That they should
be accepted as a common faith by a crowd of people much resembling a
fairly well-to-do suburban church congregation stirred her surprise and
even dismay.

“I don’t see how intelligent folk can hold such views,” she said to
Roger Blenkiron, who had been defending the Russian Soviet system as a
philosophic experiment in government.

He smiled indulgently. “Doesn’t the fault lie rather in you, dear lady,
than in the intelligent folk?”

“Would that argument stand,” she replied, “if you had been maintaining
that the earth was flat and stood still in space?”

“No. The roundness and motion of the earth are ascertained physical
facts. But—I speak with the greatest deference—can you assert it to be
a scientific fact that a community of human beings are _a priori_
incapable of managing their own affairs on a basis of social equality?”

“Of course I can,” Olivia declared, to the gentle amusement of
standers-by. “Human nature won’t allow it. With inequalities of brain
and character social equality is impossible.”

“Dear Lady”—she hated the apostrophe as he said it and the lift of the
eyebrows which caused an upward ripple that was lost in the far reaches
of his bald forehead. “Dear Lady,” said he, “in the Royal Enclosure at
Ascot you can find every grade of human intellect, from the inbred young
aristocrat who is that much removed”—he flicked a finger nail—“from a
congenital idiot to the acute-brained statesman; every grade of human
character from the lowest of moral defectives to the highest that the
present civilization can produce. And yet they are all on a social
equality. And why? They started life on a common plane. The same
phenomenon exists in a mass-meeting of working-men—in any assemblage of
human beings of a particular class who have started life on a common
plane. Now, don’t you see, that if we abolished all these series of
planes and established only one plane, social equality would be
inevitable?”

“I don’t see how you’re going to do it.”

“Ah! That’s another question. Think of what the task is. To make a clean
sweep of false principles to which mankind has subscribed for—what do I
know—say—eight thousand years. It can’t be done in a day. Not even in
a generation. If you wish to render a pestilence-stricken area
habitable, you must destroy and burn for miles around before you can
rebuild. Extend the area to a country—to the surface of the civilized
globe. That’s the philosophic theory of what is vulgarly called
Bolshevism. Let us lay waste the whole plague-stricken fabric of our
civilization, so that the world may arise, a new Phœnix, under our
children’s hands.”

“You have put the matter to Miss Gale with your usual cogency, my dear
Roger,” said Dawkins, who had joined the group. “Perhaps now she may
take a less flippant view of our activities.”

He smiled, evidently meaning to include the neophyte in the sphere of
his kind indulgence. But Olivia flushed at the rudeness of his words.

Triona who, hidden from Olivia by the standing group, had been stuffed
into a sedentary and penitential corner with two assertive women and an
earnest young Marxian gasfitter, and had, nevertheless, kept an alert
ear on the neighbouring conversation, suddenly appeared once more to her
rescue.

“Pardon me, sir,” said he, “but to one who has gone through, as I have
done, the Bolshevist horrors which you advocate so complacently, it’s
your view that hardly seems serious.”

“Atrocities, my dear friend,” said the seer-like Dawkins, “are
proverbially exaggerated.”

“There’s a fellow like you mentioned in the Bible,” retorted Triona.

“I have always admired Didymus for his scientific mind,” said Dawkins.

Triona pulled up his trouser leg and exposed his ankle. “That’s the mark
of fetters. There was a chain and a twelve pound shot at the end of it.”

“Doubtless you displeased the authorities,” said Dawkins blandly. “Oh,
I’ve read your book, Mr. Triona. But before judging I should like to
hear the other side.”

“I’m afraid, Mr. Blenkiron,” said Triona, growing white about the
nostrils, to his host who stood by in a detached sort of manner, with
his hands on his hips, “I’ve unconsciously abused your hospitality.”

Blenkiron protested cheerfully. “Not a bit, my dear fellow. We pride
ourselves on our broad mindedness. If you preached reactionary
Anglicanism here you would be listened to with respect and interest. On
the other hand, we expect the same consideration to be shown to the
apostles—if you will pardon the word—of our advanced thought. Your
experiences were, beyond doubt, very terrible. But we admit the
necessity of a reign of terror. We shall have it in this country within
the next ten years. Possibly—probably—all of us here and all the
little gods we cling to will be swept away like the late Russian
aristocracy and _intelligentsia_. But suppose we are all—Dawkins, my
sister, and myself—prepared to suffer martyrdom for the sake of
humanity, what would you have to say against us? Nay—you can be quite
frank. Words cannot hurt us.”

“I should say you ought to be tied up in Bedlam,” said Triona.

“Do you agree with that, Miss Gale?” said Roger Blenkiron, turning on
her suddenly.

She reflected for a moment. Then she replied: “If you can prove beyond
question that in fifty years’ time you will create a more beautiful
world, there’s something in your theories. If you can’t, you all ought
to be shot.”

He laughed and held out his hand. “That’s straight from the shoulder.
That’s what we like to hear. Shake hands on it.” He drew a little book
from his pocket and scribbled a memorandum. “You’re on the free-list of
_The Signal_. I think Agnes has your address. You’ll find in it
overwhelming proof. Perhaps, Mr. Triona, too, would like——”

But Triona shook his head. “As a technical alien perhaps it would be
inadvisable for me to be in receipt of revolutionary literature.”

“I quite understand,” smiled Blenkiron, returning the book to his
pocket.

Dawkins melted away. Other guests took leave of their host. Triona and
Olivia, making a suffocating course towards the door, were checked by
Agnes Blenkiron who was eager to introduce them to Tom Pyefinch who,
during the war had suffered, at the hands of a capitalist government,
the tortures of the hero too brave to fight.

“Oh, no, no,” cried Olivia horrified.

Agnes did not hear. But Pyefinch, a pallid young man with a scrubby
black moustache, was too greatly occupied with his immediate circle to
catch his hostess’s eye. From his profane lips Olivia learned that
patriotism was the most blatant of superstitions: that the attitude of
the fly preening itself over its cesspool was that of the depraved and
mindless being who could take pride in being an Englishman. He was not
peculiarly hard on England. All other countries were the mere sewerages
of the nationalities that inhabited them. The high ideals supposed to
crystallize a nation’s life were but factitious and illusory, propagated
by poets and other decadents in the pay of capitalists: in reality,
patriotism only meant the common cause of the peoples floundering each
in its separate sewer. . . .

Mere rats, he declared, changing his metaphor. That was why he and every
other intelligent man in the country refused to join in the rat fight
which was the late war.

Olivia clutched Triona’s arm. “For God’s sake, Alexis, let us get out of
this. It makes me sick.”

They drew deep breaths when they escaped into the fresh air. To Olivia,
the little overcrowded drawing-room, deafening with loud voices, sour
with the smell of milky tea and Virginian tobacco, reeking almost
physically with the madness of anarchy, seemed a miniature of the
bottomless pit. The irony of the man’s talk—the need to purify by flame
a plague-stricken area! God once destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. Why did
He not blast with fire from heaven this House of Pestilence?

Alexis Triona laughed sympathetically at her outburst.

“I confess they’re rather trying,” he remarked. “Whenever you hear
English people say they belong to the _intelligentsia_, you may be sure
they’re frightened at common sense as not being intellectual enough.
Blenkiron and Dawkins are fools of the first water; but Pyefinch is
dangerous. I am afraid I lost my temper,” he added after a few steps.

“You were splendid,” said Olivia.

More than ever did he seem the one clear-brained, purposeful man of her
acquaintance in the confused London world. Rapidly she passed them in
review as she walked. Of the others Mauregard was the best; but he was
spending his life on fribbles, his highest heaven being a smile on the
lips of a depraved dancing-woman. Then, Sydney Rooke, Mavenna, and, even
worse now than Mavenna, the unspeakable Bobby Quinton. So much for the
Lydian set of professed materialists and pleasure-seekers. In accepting
Agnes Blenkiron’s invitation she had pleasurable anticipation of
entering a sphere of earnest thinkers and social workers who might guide
her stumbling footsteps into the path of duty to herself and her kind.
And to her dismay she had met Dawkins and Blenkiron and Pyefinch,
earnest, indeed, in their sophistry and mad in their theories of
destruction. Her brain was in a whirl with the doctrines to which she
had listened. She felt terrified at she knew not what. Even Lydia’s
cynical world was better than this. Yet between these two extremes there
must be a world of high endeavour, of science, art, philanthropy,
thought; that in which, she vaguely imagined, Blaise Olifant must have
his being; even that of the women at the club dinner. But her mind shook
off women as alien to its subconscious argument. In this conjectural
London world one man alone stood out typical—the man striding loosely
by her side. A young careless angel, he had delivered her from Mavenna.
A man, he had exorcised her horror of Bobby Quinton. And now, once more,
she saw him, in her girlish fancy, a heroic figure, sane, calm, and
scornful, facing a horde of madmen.

They walked, occasionally losing their way and being put on it by chance
encounters, through the maze of new and distressingly decorous avenues,
some finished, others petering out, after a few houses, into placarded
building lots or waste land; a wilderness not of the smug villa-dom of
old-established suburbs, but of a queer bungalow-dom assertive, in its
distinctive architecture, of unreal pursuit of Aspirations in capital
letters. Most of the avenues abutted on a main street of shops with
pseudo-artistic frontages giving the impression that the inhabitants of
the City could only be induced to satisfy the vulgar needs of their
bodies by the lure of the æsthetic.

“Don’t let us judge our late friends too harshly,” said Triona waving an
arm. “All this is the Land of Self-Consciousness.”

At last they made their way through the solider, stolider fringes of the
main road, and emerged on the great thoroughfare itself, wide and
unbusied on this late summer Sunday afternoon. Prosaically they
lingered, waiting for an infrequent omnibus.

“Thank goodness, we’re out of the Land of Self-Consciousness,” said
Olivia. “The Great North Road is too big a thing.”

Their eyes met in a smile.

“I don’t forget your love of big things,” said he. “It’s inspiring. Yes.
It’s a big thing. And it doesn’t really begin in London. It starts from
Land’s End—and it goes on and on through the heart of England and
through the heart of Scotland carrying two nations’ history on its
flanks, caring for nothing but its appointed task, until it sighs at
John o’ Groats and says: ‘My duty’s done.’ There’s nothing that stirs
one’s imagination more than a great road or a great river. Somehow I
prefer the road.”

“You’re nearer to it because it was made by man.”

“How our minds work together!” he cried admiringly “I only have to say
half a thing and you complete it. More than that—you give my
meaningless ideas meaning. Yes. God’s works are great. But we can’t
measure them. We have no scale for God, But we have for Man, and so
Man’s big works thrill us and compel us.”

“What big thing could we do?” asked Olivia.

“Do you mean humanity—or you and I together?”

“Two human beings thinking alike, and free and honest.” Instinctively
she took his arm and her step danced in time with his. “Oh, you don’t
know how good it is to feel real. Let us do something big in the world.
What can we do?”

“You can help me to the very biggest thing in all the universe—for me,”
he cried, pressing her arm tight against him.

Her pulses throbbed. She knew that further argument on her part would be
but exquisite playing with words. The hour which, in her maidenly
uncertainty she had dreaded, had now come, and all fear had passed away.
Yes; now she was real; now she was certain that her love was real. Real
man, real woman. Her heart leaped to him with almost the shock of
physical pain. Again in a flash she swept the Lydian and the Blenkiron
firmament and exulted. Yet in her happiness she said with very foolish
and with very feminine guile:

“Ah, my dear Alexis, that’s what I’ve longed for. If only I could be of
some little help to you!”

“Help?” He laughed shortly and halted and swung her round. “Have you
ever tried to think what you are to me? Would you like me to tell you?”

She disengaged herself and walked delicately on.

“It may pass the time till the bus comes,” she said.

He began to tell her. And three minutes afterwards the noisy, infrequent
motor-bus passed them by, unheeded and even unperceived.


                               CHAPTER XI

SOMEWHERE on the South Coast, screened from the vulgar by the trap of a
huge watering-place, is a long, thin, sandy promontory sticking out to
sea, like an innocent rib of wilderness. Here there is no fun of the
fair, because there is no fair to provide the fun. There are no taverns,
no boarding-houses, no lodgings. One exclusive little hotel rules the
extreme tip of the tongue of land in consort with the miniature jetty
and quay by which, in late exciting times, strange craft were moored,
flying the white ensign and hoar with North Sea brine and deadly
secrets. The rest of the spit is peppered with a score of little shy
houses, each trying to hide itself from its neighbours, in the privacy
of its own sandpit. If your house is on the more desirable side of it,
you can look out over the vastness of the sea with the exhilarating
certainty (if your temperament may thereby be exhilarated) that there is
nothing but blue water between you and the coast of Africa. If your
house is, less fortunately, on the other side, your view commands a
spacious isle-studded harbour fringed by distant blue and mysterious
hills. But it is given to any one to walk out of the back of his little
hermitage, and, standing in the dividing road, to enjoy, in half a
minute, both aspects at once. It is called esoterically by its
frequenters “the Point,” so that the profane, map-searching, may not
discover its whereabouts.

Just high enough to be under the lee of a sand-hill, with its front
windows and veranda staring at the African coast, some thousand miles
away, stood the tiniest, most fragile and most absurd of the
habitations. Its name was “Quien Sabe,” suggestive of an imaginative
abandonment of search after nomenclature by the original proprietor.

“A house called ‘Quien Sabe’——” said Alexis.

“Is the house for us,” cried Olivia, aglow.

They took it at once, without question. It wasn’t as if it were an
uncertain sort of place, like “Normanhurst,” or “Sea View.” The name
proclaimed frankly the certainty of venturesomeness. And Alexis Triona,
sitting on the scrubby grass and sand, his back against the little
veranda, the infinite sea and all the universe enveloped in still
moonlight, laughed the laugh of deep happiness at their childish
inspiration. He rolled, licked and lit the final cigarette. Tobacco was
good. Better was this August night of velvet and diamonds. Below, the
little stone groin shone like onyx. The lazy surf of ebb-tide far away
on the sand of a tiny bay glimmered like the foam in fairyland.

Only half the man’s consciousness allowed itself to be drenched with the
beauty of the night. The other half remained alert to a voice, to a
summons, to something more rare and exquisite than the silver air and
murmuring sea and the shine of all the stars. A few minutes before,
languorous by his side, she had been part and parcel of it all. The
retreating ripple of wave had melted into the softness of her voice. Her
laughing eyes had gleamed importance in the stellar system. The sweet
throb of her body, as she had reclined, his arm about her, was rhythmic
with the pulsation of the night. And now she had gone; gone just for a
few moments; gone just for a few moments until she would divinely break
the silence by the little staccato cry of his name; but, nevertheless,
her transitory severance had robbed this outer world of half its beauty.
He had consciously to incorporate her in order to give meaning to this
wonder of amethyst and aquamarine and onyx and diamond and pearl and
velvet and the infinite message of the immensities coming through the
friendly silence of the moon.

                 *        *        *        *        *

They had been married all of a sudden, both caught up on the wings of
adventure. They were young, free as air. Why should they wait? They kept
it secret, a pair of romantics. Only Blaise Olifant, summoned from
Medlow, and Janet Philimore were admitted into the conspiracy, and
attended the wedding. At first Olivia had twinges of conscience. As a
well-conducted young woman she ought to ask her old friend, Mr. Trivett,
to stand _in loco parentis_ and give her away. But then there would be
Mrs. Trivett and the girls to reckon with. Mr. Fenmarch, left out, might
take offence. The news, too, would run through every Medlow parlour. Old
John Freke, in his weekly letter to Lydia, would be sure to allude to
the matter; and it was Lydia and the galley that she most desired to
keep in ignorance. So they were married, by special licence, at the
church in Ashley Place, one quiet, sunny morning, in the presence of
Myra and the two witnesses they had convened.

As they emerged into the sunshine after the ceremony, Olifant said to
her:

“I’ve never been so reluctant to give anything away in my life.”

She asked a laughing “Why?”

“Dog in the manger, I suppose.” He smiled whimsically. “I shall feel
more of a bachelor than ever when I get back.”

“You needn’t, unless you like.” She motioned slightly with her head
towards Janet, talking to Alexis, a few feet away. “I’ve not been too
busy to think of matchmaking. She’s the dearest of girls.”

“But not my landlady.”

Her happy laughter rippled forth, calling the others near.

“He wants a law forbidding the marriage of landladies. But think of the
advantage. Now you can have your landlady to stay with you—in strict
propriety—if you will ask us.”

“We settled that with Alexis last night,” said he.

Three taxis were waiting. One for the bride and bridegroom. One, already
piled with luggage, for Myra who after being fervently kissed in the
vestry by Olivia, had said by way of congratulation:

“Well, dearie, it’s better than being married in a Registry Office,” and
had gone forth unemotionally to see that the trunks were still there.
And one for Olifant and Janet. They drove to the station, to the train
which was to take them on their way to the home which in their
romanticism they had never troubled to see.

“I’m sure it’s all right,” said Janet, who had been responsible for
their taking “Quien Sabe.” “Father and I’ll be at The Point in a
fortnight. If you don’t want to see us, tie a white satin bow on the
gate and we won’t mind a bit.”

For General Philimore was the happy owner of one of the little
hermitages on The Point, and like a foolish old soldier lived there in
holiday times, instead of letting it for the few summer weeks at the
yearly rental of his London flat; so that Janet assumed the airs of an
authority on The Point, and wrote stern uncompromising business letters
to agents threatening them with the displeasure of the daughter of a
Major-General, if a “Quien Sabe” swept, garnished, and perfectly
appointed, with a charwoman, ditto, in attendance, did not receive the
bridal pair.

“It’s not a palace, Mr. Triona,” she said.

“What has it to do with me?” he answered. “A dream nest in a cliff for
this bird wife of mine is all I ask for.”

Olivia’s eyes smiled on him. Why was he so different from the rest of
men—even from so fine a type as Blaise Olifant? She appraised them
swiftly. The soldier had not yet been sunk into the scholar. He stood
erect, clean built, wearing his perfectly fitting grey suit like
uniform, his armless sleeve pinned across his chest, his lip still
bearing the smart little military moustache, his soft grey hat at ever
so slightly a swaggering angle on his neatly cropped head. A
distinguished figure, to which his long straight nose added a curious
note of distinction and individuality. But all that he was you saw in a
glance: the gentleman, the soldier, the man of intellect. On the other
hand, there stood the marvellous man that was her husband, hiding behind
the drawn boyish face God knew what memories of pain heroically
conquered and God knew what visions of genius. Although he had gone to a
good tailor for his blue serge suit—she had accompanied him—he had the
air of wearing clothes as a concession of convention. The lithe frame
beneath seemed to be impatient of their restraint. They fitted in an
easy sort of way, but were dominated by his nervous eager personality.
One flash of a smile illuminating eyes and thin face, one flashing
gesture of hand or arm, and for ought any one knew or cared, he might be
dressed in chain armour or dungaree.

The little speech pleased her. She slipped her hand through the crook of
his arm in the pride of possession.

“Did you ever hear such an undomesticated pronouncement?” she laughed.
“We’re going to change all that.”

And the train carried them off to the great wonder and change of their
lives.

The train out of sight, Blaise Olifant stuck in his pocket the
handkerchief he had been waving, and turned with a sigh.

“I hope she’ll be happy.”

“Why shouldn’t she?” asked Janet Philimore.

She was a bright-cheeked, brown-eyed, brown-haired girl, with a
matter-of-fact manner.

“I know of no reason,” he replied. “I was expressing a hope.”

He saw her to her homeward-bound omnibus and walked, somewhat moodily,
on his road. After a day or two, the pleasures of London proving
savourless, he returned to Medlow. But “The Towers” no longer seemed
quite the same. He could not tell why. The house had lost fragrance.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Meanwhile the pair had gone to the little toy home whose questioning
name pointed to mystery. There were just three rooms in it, all opening
on to a veranda full in sight (save for the configuration of the globe)
of the African coast. On this veranda, sitting back, they lost sight of
the whin-grown slope and the miniature sandy cove beneath; and their
world was but a welter of sea, and its inhabitants but a few gulls,
sweeping and swirling past them with a shy friendliness in their yellow
eyes. In a dip of the sand-hill, just behind this elementary dwelling
and communicating with it by a short covered way, stretched an old
railway carriage divided into kitchen, pantry, bathroom, and bunks.

“It’s the craziest place I’ve ever seen,” said Myra. “People will be
living in old aeroplanes next.”

But the very craziness of the habitation made for their selfish joy. The
universe, just for these twain, had gone joyously mad. A cocky little
villa made to the model of a million others would have defeated the
universe’s benign intention. Nothing could be nearer to Triona’s dream
nest in a cliff. Their first half-hour’s exploring, hand in hand, was
that of children let loose in a fairy tale castle.

“There’s only one egg-cup,” croaked Myra, surveying an exiguous row of
crockery.

“How many more do we want?” cried Olivia. “We can only eat one egg at a
time.”

They passed out and stood on the edge of their small domain, surveying
the sandy beach and the seaweed and shell-encrusted groin and the
limitless sea, and breathed in the soft salt wind of all the heavens
sweeping through their hair and garments, and he put his arm around her
and kissed her—and he laughed and said, looking into her eyes:

“Sweetheart, Heaven is empty and all the angels are here.”

On sunny days they lived in the sea, drying themselves on their
undisturbed half-moon of beach.

“Where did you learn to swim?” she asked.

He hesitated for a second, casting at her one of his swift, half furtive
glances. Then he replied:

“In the Volga.”

She laughed. “You’re always romantic. I learned at commonplace
Llandudno.”

“Where’s your sense of relativity, beloved?” said he. “In Central Russia
one regards the coast of Wales as fantastic fairyland.”

“Still, you can go to Llandudno to-morrow, if you like—taking me with
you, of course; but I shall never swim in the Volga, or the Caspian Sea,
or Lake Baikal, or any of those places with names that have haunted me
since I was a little girl.”

“One of these days we’ll go—it may be some years, but eventually Russia
must have a settled Government—and we’ll still be young.”

The sun and the hot sand on which she lay, adorable in deep red bathing
kit and cap, warmed her through and through, flooding her with the sense
of physical well-being. It was impossible that she should ever grow old.

“It’s something to look forward to,” she said.

Sometimes they hired a boat and sailed and fished. She admired his
handiness and knowledge and prescience of the weather. Once, as the
result of their fishing, they brought in a basket of bass and gar-fish,
the latter a strange, dainty silver beast with the body of an eel and
the tail of a trout and the beak of a woodcock, and in high spirits they
usurped Myra’s railway-compartment kitchen, while he fried the catch for
lunch. Olivia marvelled at his mastery. In spite of her sage and
deliberate putting aside of the rose-coloured glasses of infatuation, in
whatever aspect she viewed him, he stood supreme. From the weaving of
high romance to the cooking of fish—the whole gamut of human
activities—there was nothing in which he did not excel. Her trust in
him was infinite. She lost herself in happiness.

It took some days to arouse her to a sense of the outer world. A letter
from Lydia reminded her of her friend’s pleasant ignorance. With the
malice of the unregenerate feminine, she wrote: “I’m so sorry I can’t be
bridesmaid as you had arranged. How can I, seeing that I am married
myself? It happened all in a hurry, as the beautiful things in life do.
The fuss of publicity would have spoilt it. That’s why we told nobody.
This is much better than Dinard”—Sydney Rooke’s selection for the
honeymoon. “I haven’t worn a hat since I’ve been here, and my way of
dressing for dinner is to put on a pair of stockings; sometimes a
mackintosh, for we love to dine on the veranda when it rains. It rained
so hard last night that we had to fix up an umbrella to the ceiling like
a chandelier to catch the water coming through the roof. So you will see
that Alexis and I are perfectly happy. By the way, I’ve not told you
what my name is. It is Mrs. Triona. . . .” And so on and so on at the
dictate of her dancing gladness, freakishly picturing Lydia’s looks of
surprise, distaste, and reprobation as she read the letter. Yet she
finished graciously, acknowledging Lydia’s thousand kindnesses, for
according to her lights Lydia had done her best to put her on the only
path that could be trod by comely and well-dressed woman.

She sealed up her letter and, coming out on to the veranda where Alexis
was correcting the proofs of an article, told him all about it.

“Don’t you think we ought to please Lydia and go to Dinard and wear
wonderful clothes, and mix with fashionable folk, and have expensive
meals and gamble in the Casino, and dance and do our duty as
self-respecting people?”

“You have but to change yourself into whatever fairy thing you like, my
princess,” said he, “and I will follow you. Where you are, the world is.
Where you are not, there is the blankness of before creation.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Sitting that night, with his back against the veranda, he thought of
this speech of the afternoon. Formulated a bit self-consciously, it was
nevertheless true. The landscape, no matter what it was, existed merely
as a setting for her. Even in this jewelled wonder of moonlit sea and
sky there was the gap of the central gem.

He rolled and lit another cigarette—this time, surely, the very last.
Why she took so long to disrobe, he never strove to conjecture. Her
exquisite feminine distance from him was a conception too tremulous to
be gripped with a rough hand and brutally examined. That was the lure
and the delight of her, mystical, paradoxical—he could define it only
vaguely as the nearness of her set in a far-off mystery. At once she was
concrete and strong as the sea, and as elusive as the Will-o’-the-Wisp
of his dreams.

Thus the imaginative lover; the man who, by imagining fantasies to be
real, had made them real; who, grasping realities, had woven round them
the poet’s fantasy.

And meanwhile Olivia, secure in her happiness, kept him waiting and
dreaming because she had made a romantic vow to record, before going to
sleep, each day’s precious happenings in a diary which she kept under
lock and key in her dressing-case. She wrote sitting up in bed, and now
and then she sniffed and smiled as the soft air came through the open
window laden with the perfume of the cigarette.


                              CHAPTER XII

IN the course of time, Janet Philimore and her attendant father, the
General, arrived at their house on The Point, and as Olivia, apprised of
their advent, did not tie a white satin bow on her gate, General and
Miss Philimore left cards on the newly wedded couple, or, more exactly,
a pencilled leaf torn out of a notebook.

Thus arose a little intimacy which Olivia encouraged on Alexis’s
account. Had not her father and brothers trained her in the ways of men,
one of which vital ways was that which led to the social intercourse of
man with man? Besides, it was a law of sex. If she had not a woman to
talk to, she declared, she would go crazy. It was much more comforting
to powder one’s nose in the privacy of the gynæceum than beneath man’s
unsympathetic stare. Conversely it had been a dictum of her father’s
that, in order to enjoy port, men must be released from the distracting
chatter of women.

“If I’m not broad-minded, I’m nothing,” said Olivia.

“‘Broad’ is inadequate,” replied her husband, thrusting back his brown
hair. “The very wonder of you is that your mind is as wide as the
infinite air.”

Which, of course, was as pleasant a piece of information as any bride
could receive.

The magic of the halcyon days was intensified by the satisfaction of the
sex cravings which, by the symbolism of nose-powdering and
port-drinking, Olivia had enunciated. In the deeps of her soul she could
find no consuming passion for sitting scorched in a boat with a baited
and contemptuously disregarded line between expectant finger and thumb.
She could not really understand the men’s anxiety to induce a mentally
defective fish to make a fool of itself. Yet she would have sat
blissfully for hours at his bidding, for the mere joy of doing as she
was bidden; but not to be bidden was a great relief. Similarly, Alexis
could not vie with Olivia in concentration of being over the selection
of material (in the fly-trap of a great watering-place previously
mentioned) and over the pattern and the manufacture by knitting of gaudy
hued silk jumpers. His infatuated eye marvelled at the delicate
swiftness of her fingers, at the magical development of the web that was
to encase her adorable body. But his heart wasn’t in it. Janet’s was.
And General Philimore brought to the hooking of bass the earnest
singleness of purpose that, vague years ago, had enabled him to ensnare
thousands of Huns in barbed-wire netting.

The primitive laws of sex asserted themselves, to the common happiness.
The men fished; the women fashioned garments out of raw material. We
can’t get away from the essentials of the Stone Age. And why in the
world should we?

But—and here comes the delight of the reactions of
civilization—invariably the last quarter of an hour of these exclusive
sex-communings was filled with boredom and impatience. Alone at last,
they would throw themselves into each other’s arms with unconscionable
gracelessness and say: “Thank Heaven, they’ve gone!” And then the sun
would shine more brightly and the lap of the waves around them would add
buoyancy to their bodies, and Myra, ministering to their table wants,
would assume the guise of a high priestess consecrating their intimacy,
and the moon would invest herself with a special splendour in their
honour.

Now and then the four came together; a picnic lunch at some spot across
the bay; a wet after-dinner rubber at bridge, or an hour’s gossip of old
forgotten far-off things and battles of the day before yesterday, or—in
the General’s house—a little idle music. There it was that Olivia
discovered another accomplishment in her wonderful husband. He could
play, sensitively, by ear—knowledge of notated music he disclaimed.
Having been impressed as a child with the idea that playing from ear was
a sin against the holy spirit of musical instruction, and gaining from
such instruction (at Landsdowne House—how different if she had been
trained in the higher spheres of Blair Park!) merely a distaste for
mechanical fingering of printed notes, she had given up music with a
sigh of relief, mingled with regret, and had remained unmusical. And
here was Alexis, who boasted his ignorance of the difference between a
crotchet and an arpeggio, racking the air with the poignant melancholy
of Russian folk-songs, and, in a Puckish twinkle, setting their pulses
dancing with a mad modern rhythm of African savagery.

“But, dear, what else can you do?” she asked, after the first exhibition
of this unsuspected gift. “Tell me; for these shocks aren’t good for my
health.”

“On the mouth-organ,” he laughed, “I’ve not met any one to touch me.”

It was not idle boasting. On their next rainy-day visit to the
neighbouring town, Olivia slipped into a toy shop and bought the most
swollenly splendid of these instruments that she could find, and Alexis
played “The Marseillaise” upon it with all the blare of a steam
orchestrion.

The happy days sped by in an atmosphere of love and laughter, yet filled
not only with the sweet doings of idleness. Olivia discovered that the
poet-artist must work, impelled thereto by his poet-artistry. He must
write of the passing things which touched his imagination and which his
imagination, in turn, transmuted into impressions of beauty. These were
like a painter’s sketches, said he, for use in after-time.

“It’s for you, my dear, that I am making a hoard of our golden moments,
so that one of these days I may lay them all at your feet.”

And he must read, too. During the years that the locust of war had
eaten, his educational development had stood still. His English literary
equipment fell far short of that required by a successful English man of
letters. Vast tracts of the most glorious literature in the world he had
as yet left unexplored. The great Elizabethan dramatists, for instance.
Thick, serious volumes from the London Library strewed the furniture of
the wind-swept sitting-room. Olivia, caught by his enthusiasm and proud
to identify herself with him in this feeding of the fires of his genius,
read with him; and to them together were revealed the clanging majesty
of Marlowe, the subtle beauty of Beaumont and Fletcher, the haunting
gloom of Webster. In the evenings they would sit, lover-like, the book
between them, and read aloud, taking parts; and it never failed to be an
astonishment and a thrill to the girl when, declaiming a fervid passage,
he seemed for the moment to forget her and to live in the sense of the
burning words. It was her joy to force her emotion to his pitch.

Once, reading Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Philaster_, he clutched her
tightly with his left arm, while his right hand upstretched, invoked
unheeding Heaven, and declaimed:

        “And then have taken me some mountain girl,
        Beaten with winds, chaste as the hardened rocks
        Whereon she dwells; that might have strewn my bed
        With leaves and reeds, and with the skins o’ Beasts,
        Our neighbours; and have borne at her big breasts
        My large coarse issue! This had been a life
        Free from vexation.”

“But, Alexis, darling, I’m so sorry,” she cried.

“Why? What do you mean?”

“You said it as if you meant it, as if it was the desire of your heart.
I’m not a bit like that.”

They laughed and kissed. A dainty interlude.

“You’ve never really felt like that?”

“Never.”

“The idea isn’t even new,” exclaimed Olivia, with grand inversion of
chronology. “Tennyson has something like it in _Locksley Hall_. How does
it go?”

With a wrinkling of the brow she quoted:

“Then the passions cramped no longer shall have scope and breathing space
I will take some savage woman, she shall rear my dusky race.

“Iron-jointed, supple-sinewed, they shall dive and they shall run,
Catch the wild goat by the hair, and hurl their lances in the sun.”

“So he did!” cried Triona. “How wonderful of you to remember! Why—the
dear beautiful old thief!” He forgot the point at issue in contemplation
of the literary coincidence of plagiarism. “Well, I’m damned! Such a
crib! With the early Victorian veil of prudery over it! Oh, Lord! Give
me the Elizabethan, any day. Yet, isn’t it funny? The period-spirit? If
Tennyson had been an Elizabethan, he would have walked over Beaumont and
Fletcher like a Colossus; but in a world under the awe of Queen
Victoria’s red flannel petticoat he is reduced to stealing Elizabethan
thunder and reproducing it with a bit of sheet iron and a stick.”

“Dear,” said Olivia, “we have much to be thankful for.”

“You and I?” he queried.

“Our generation. We live in the sun. No longer under the shadow of the
red flannel petticoat.”

Rapturously he called her a marvel among women. Olivia’s common sense
discounted the hyperbole; but she loved his tribute to her sally of wit.

The book slipped to the floor, while she began an argument on the
morality of plagiarism. How far was a man justified in stealing another
man’s idea, working up another man’s material?

His sudden and excited defence of the plagiarist surprised her. He rose,
strode about the room and, talking, grew eloquent; quoted Shakespeare as
the great exemplar of the artist who took his goods from everywhere he
found them. Olivia, knowing his joy in conversational fence, made
smiling attack.

“In the last three hundred years we have developed a literary
conscience.”

“A commercial matter,” he declared. “A question of copyright. I granted
that. You have no right to exploit another man’s ideas to his material
loss. But take a case like this”—he paced before her for a few
seconds—“on the spur of the moment. It must have happened a thousand
times in the War. An unknown dead man just a kilometre away from a bleak
expanse of waste covered with thousands of dead men. Some one happens
upon him. Searches him for identification. Finds nothing of any use or
interest save a little notebook with leaves of the thinnest paper next
his skin. And he glances through the book and sees at once that it is no
ordinary diary of war—discomfort of billets, so many miles’ march,
morale of the men and so forth—but something quite different. He puts
it in his pocket. For all that the modern world is concerned, the dead
man is as lost as any skeleton dug up in an ancient Egyptian grave-yard.
The living man, when he has leisure, reads the closely written
manuscript book, finds it contains rough notes of wonderful experiences,
thoughts, imaginings. But all in a jumble, ill expressed, chaotic.
Suppose, now, the finder, a man with the story-teller’s gift, weaves a
wonderful thrilling tale out of this material. Who is injured? Nobody.
On the contrary, the world is the richer.”

“If he were honest, he ought to tell the truth in a preface,” said
Olivia.

Triona laughed. “Who would believe him? The trick of writing false
prefaces in order to give verisimilitude is so overworked that people
won’t believe the genuine ones.”

“I suppose that’s so,” she acquiesced. Her interest in the argument was
only a reflection of his. She was far more eager to resume the
interrupted reading of _Philaster_.

“It’s lovely that we always see things in the same way,” said he,
sitting down again by her side.

Besides all this delightful work and play there was the practical future
to be considered. They could not live for ever at “Quien Sabe” on The
Point, nor could they live at the Lord knows where anywhere else. They
must have a home.

“Before you stole over my being and metamorphosed me, I should have
asked—why?” he said. “Any old dry hole in a tree would have done for
me, until I got tired of it and flew to another. But now——”

“Now you’re dying to live in a nice little house and have your meals
regular and pay rates and taxes, and make me a respectable woman.”

They decided that a house was essential. It would have to be furnished.
But what was the object of buying new furniture at the present fantastic
prices when she had a great house full of it—from real Chippendale
chairs to sound fish-kettles? The answer was obvious.

“Why not Medlow? Olifant won’t stay there for ever. He hinted as much.”

She shook her head. No. Medlow was excellent for cabbages, but
passion-flowers like her Alexis would wilt and die. He besought her with
laughing tenderness not to think of him. From her would he drink in far
more sunlight and warmth than his passion-flower-like nature could need.
Had she not often told him of her love for the quaint old house and its
sacred associations? It would be a joy to him to see her link up the old
life with the new.

“Besides,” he urged, attributing her reluctance to solicitude for his
happiness, “it’s the common-sense solution. There’s our natural
headquarters. We needn’t stay there all the year round, from year’s end
to year’s end. When we want to throw a leg we can run away, to London,
Paris, “Quien Sabe,” John o’ Groats—the wide world’s before us.”

But Olivia kept on shaking her head. Abandoning metaphor, she insisted
on the necessity of his taking the position he had gained in the social
world of art and letters. Hadn’t he declared a day or two ago that good
talk was one of the most stimulating pleasures in life? What kind of
talk could Medlow provide? It was far more sensible, when Major
Olifant’s tenancy was over, to move the furniture to their new
habitation and let “The Towers” unfurnished.

“As you will, belovedest,” he said. “Yet,” he added, with a curious note
of wistfulness, “I learned to love the house and the sleepy old town and
the mouldering castle.” The practical decision to which she was brought
out of honeymoon lotus-land was the first cloud on her married
happiness. It had never occurred to her before that she could have
anything to conceal from her husband. Not an incident in the Lydian
galley had her ingenuousness not revealed. But now she felt consciously
disingenuous, and it was horrible. How could she confess the real reason
for her refusal to live in Medlow? Was she not to him the Fairy
Princess? He had told her so a thousand times. He had pictured his first
vision of her glowing flame colour and dusk beneath the theatre portico,
his other vision of her exquisite in moonlight and snowflake in the
great silent street. His faith in her based itself on the axiom of her
regality. Woman-like, she had laughed within herself at his dear
illusions. But that was the key of the staggering position; his
illusions were inexpressibly dear to her; they were the priceless jewels
of her love. With just a little craft, so sweet, so divinely humorous,
to exercise she could maintain these illusions to the end of time. . . .

But not at Medlow.

She had gone forth from it, on her pilgrimage, in order to establish
herself in her mother’s caste. And she had succeeded. The name of her
grandfather, Bagshawe of the Guides, had been a password to the
friendships which now she most valued. Marriage had defined her social
ambitions. They were modest, fundamentally sane. Her husband, a man of
old family and gentle upbringing, ranked with her mother and General and
Janet Philimore. He was a man of genius, too, and his place was among
the great ones of the social firmament.

She thought solely in terms of caste, gentle and intellectual. She swept
aside the meretricious accessories of the Sydney Rooke gang with a
reactionary horror.

A few days before, Alexis, lyrically lover like, had said:

“You are so beautiful. If only I could string your neck with pearls, and
build you a great palace . . .” etcetera, etcetera, etcetera, in the
manner of the adoring, but comparatively impecunious poet.

And she had replied:

“I don’t want pearls, palaces or motor-cars. They’re all symbols, my
dear, of the Unreal. Ordinary comfort of food and warmth and decent
clothes—yes. But that’s all. So long as you string my heart with
love—and my mind with noble thoughts.”

She longed passionately to live with him, above herself. And yet, here
at the outset, was she living below herself. She would wake in the
morning and, sleepless, grow hot and clammy at the thought of her
deception. And the whole of her Medlow life drifted miserably through
her consciousness: the schoolgirl’s bitter resentment of the
supercilious nose in the air attitude of the passing crocodile of Blair
Park; of the vicar’s daughters’ condescending nod—he was a Canon of
somewhere and an “Honourable” to boot—at “that pretty Miss Gale”; her
recognition, when she came to years of sense, of the social gulf between
her family and the neighbouring gentry whose lives, with their tennis
parties and dances and social doings, seemed so desirable and so remote.
To bring her wonderful husband into that world of “homely folk,” the
excellent, but uncultivated Trivetts, the more important tradespeople,
the managers of the mills, the masters of the County School, her
father’s world, and to see him rigidly excluded from that to which her
mother and he himself belonged, was more than she could bear. She
tortured herself with the new problem of snobbery—rating herself, in
this respect, beneath Lydia, who was frankly cynical as to both her own
antecedents and her late husband’s social standing. But for the life of
her she could not bring herself to explain to Alexis the real
impossibility of Medlow. When she tried, she found that his foreign
upbringing failed to seize the fine shade of her suggestion.

His gay carelessness eventually lulled her conscience. As soon as
Olifant had done with “The Towers,” they could transfer the furniture to
whatever habitation they chose and let the house.

“I feel you couldn’t find it in your heart to sell the old place,” he
said. “Besides—who knows—one of these days——”

She thought him the most delicately perceptive of men.

“No, dear,” she said, her cheek against his. “I couldn’t sell it.”

Then all Medlow danger was over. She breathed freely. But still—the
little cloud of deceit hung over her serene mind and cast ever so tiny a
shadow over her rapturous life.

They had been four weeks in the deliciously sure uncertainty of “Quien
Sabe,” when, one noon while they were drying themselves in the hot sand
and sunshine of their tiny bay, after a swim, Myra came down gaunt
through the whin-covered hill-side with a telegram in her hand. With the
perversity of her non-recognition of the household paramountcy of her
master, she handed the envelope to Olivia. The name was just “Triona.”
Olivia was about to open it instinctively when Alexis started to a
sitting position, and, with an eager glance, held out his hand.

“I think it’s for me. I was expecting it. Do you mind?”

She passed it over with a smile. Alexis rose to his feet, tore the
envelope open, and moving a few yards away towards the surf read the
message. Then slowly he tore it up into the tiniest fragments and
scattered them on the last wavelets of the ebb tide, and stood for a
second or two, staring across the sea. At last he turned. Olivia rose to
meet him. Myra was impassively making her way back up the rough slope.

“What’s the matter?” asked Olivia, puzzled at his scrupulous destruction
of the telegram and reading something like fear in his eyes.

“I’ve had bad news,” he said. He picked up his bath-gown, shook it free
from sand, and huddled it around him. “Let us get up to the house.” He
shivered. “It’s cold.”

She followed him wonderingly.

“What bad news?” she asked.

He turned his head, with a half-laugh. “Nothing so very desperate. The
end of the world hasn’t come yet. I’ll tell you when I’ve changed.”

He rushed up the steps of the veranda and into his little dressing-room.
Olivia, dry and warm, sat in a sun-beat chair and anxiously waited for
him. The instinct of a loving woman, the delicacy of a sensitive soul,
forbade her teasing with insistent questions a man thrown for the moment
off his balance. Yet she swept the horizon of her mind for reasons.

A quarter of an hour afterwards—it had seemed a quarter of a
century—he appeared, dressed, not in his customary flannels, but in the
blue serge suit of their wedding day. The sight of it struck a chill
through her heart.

“You are going away?”

He nodded. “Yes, my dear, I have to.”

“Why? What has happened?”

“I can’t tell you, dear. That’s the heart-rending part of it. It’s
secret—from the Foreign Office.”

She reacted in laughter. “Oh, my darling—how you frightened me. I
thought it was something serious.”

“Of course it’s serious, if I have to leave you for three or four
days—perhaps a week.”

“A week!” She stood aghast. It was serious. How could she face a lonely
epoch of seven days, each counting twenty-four thousand halting hours?
What did it mean?

“There are not many men who know Russian as I do. I’ve been in touch
with the Intelligence Department ever since I landed in England. That’s
why I went to Finland in the autumn. These things bind me to inviolable
secrecy, beloved. You understand, don’t you?”

“Of course I understand,” she replied proudly.

“I could refuse—if you made a point of it. I’m a free man.”

She put her two hands on his shoulders—and ever after he had this one
more unforgettable picture of her—the red bathing cap knotted in front,
dainty, setting off her dark eyes and her little eager face—the
peignoir, carelessly loose, revealing the sweet, frank mould of her
figure in the red bathing suit.

“My father and my two brothers gave their lives for England. Do you
think I could be so utterly selfish as to grudge my country a week of my
husband’s society?”

He took her cheeks in his hands. “More and more do you surpass the
Princess of my dreams.”

She laughed. “I’m an Englishwoman.”

“And so, you don’t want to know where I’m going?”

She moved aside. “Of course I do. I shall be in a fever till you come
back. But if I’m not to know—well—I’m not to know. It’s enough for me
that you’re serving your country. Tell me,” she said suddenly, catching
him by the coat lapels. “There’s no danger.”

He smiled. “Not a little tiny bit. Of that you can be assured. The worst
is a voyage to Helsingfors and back. So I gathered from the telegram,
which was in execrable Foreign Office Russian.”

“And when are you going?”

“By the first train. I must report to-night.”

“Can’t I come with you—as far as London?”

He considered for a moment. “No,” he said. “Where would you sleep? In
all probability I shall have to take the midnight boat to Havre.”

An hour later they parted. She returned to the empty house frightened at
she knew not what, insecure, terrifyingly alone; she was fretted by an
uncanny sense of having mated with the inhabitant of another planet who
had suddenly taken wing through the vast emptiness to the strange sphere
of his birth. She wandered up and down the veranda, in and out of the
three intimate rooms, where the traces of his late presence, books,
papers, clothes, lay strewn carelessly about. She smiled wanly,
reflecting that he wore his surroundings loosely as he did his clothes.
Suddenly she uttered a little feminine cry, as her glance fell on his
wrist watch lying on the drawing-room mantelpiece. He had forgotten it.
She took it up with the impulsive intention of posting it to him at
once. But the impulse fell into the nervelessness of death, when she
remembered that he had given her no address. She must await his
telegram—to-morrow, the next day, the day after, he could not say.
Meanwhile, he would be chafing at the lack of his watch. She worried
herself infinitely over the trifle, unconsciously finding relief in the
definite.

The weary hours till night passed by. She tried to read. She tried to
eat. She thought of going over the road to the Philimores’ for company;
but her mood forbade. For all their delicacy they would ask reasons for
this sudden abandonment. She magnified its importance. She could have
said: “My husband has gone to London on business.” But to her brain,
overwrought by sudden emotion, the commonplace excuse seemed inadequate.
She shrank from the society of her kind friends, who would regard this
interplanetary mystery as a matter of course.

If only Alexis had taken his watch! Perhaps he would have time to buy
another—a consoling thought. Meanwhile she strapped it on her own
wrist, heroically resolved not to part with it night or day until he
returned.

She sat by the lamp on the sitting-room table, looking out over the
veranda at the pitch blackness of a breathless night in which not even
the mild beat of the surf could be heard. She might have been in some
far Pacific desert island. Her book lay on her lap—the second volume of
Motley’s _Dutch Republic_. All the Alvas and Williams, all the heroes
and villains, all the soldiers and politicians and burghers were
comfortably dead hundreds of years ago. What did these dead men matter,
when one living man, the equal of them all, had gone forth from her,
into the unknowableness of the night?

Myra came into the room with an amorphous bundle in her hand.

“The camp bed in the dressing-room isn’t very comfortable—but I suppose
I can sleep on it.”

Olivia turned swiftly in her chair, startled into human realities.

“No. It’s a beast of a thing. But I should love to have you to be with
me. You’re a dear. You sleep in my bed and I’ll take the dressing-room.”

“You once gave signs of being a woman of sense,” said Myra tonelessly.
“It seems I was mistaken.”

She disappeared with her bundle. Olivia put out the light and went to
bed, where she lay awake all the night, fantastically widowed, striving
with every nerve and every brain-cell to picture the contemporaneous
situation of her husband. Three o’clock in the morning. He would be in
mid-Channel. Had he secured a berth? Or was he forced to walk up and
down the steamer’s deck? Thank Heaven, it was a black still night. She
stole out of bed and looked at the sea. A sea of oil. It was something
to be grateful for. But the poor boy without his watch—the watch which
had marked for him the laggard minutes of captivity, the racing hours of
approaching death, the quiet, rhythmic companion and recorder of his
amazing life.

She forced all her will power to sleep; but the blank of him there on
the infinite expanse of mattress she felt like a frost. The dawn found
her with wide and sleepless eyes.

And while she was picturing this marvel among men standing by the
steamer’s side in the night, in communion with the clear and heavy
stars, holding in his adventurous grasp the secret of a world’s peace,
Alexis Triona was speeding northwards, sitting upright in a third-class
carriage, to Newcastle-on-Tyne. And at Newcastle he expected no ship to
take him to Finland. Lucky if he found a cab in the early morning to
take him to his destination three miles away.

For the telegram which he had torn to pieces had not come from the War
Office. It was not written in Russian. It was in good, plain, curt
English:

“Mother dying. Come at once.”


                              CHAPTER XIII

A TAXICAB took him in dreary rain through the squalor of Tyneside, now
following the dismal tram lines, now cutting through mean streets, until
they reached a row of low, bow-windows agglutinated little villas with
handkerchief of garden separating them from the road. At No. 17 he
dismissed the cab and swung wide the flimsy gate. Before he could enter,
the house door opened and a woman appeared, worn and elderly, in a
cheap, soiled wrapper.

“I suppose that’s you, John. I shouldn’t have recognized you.”

She spoke with a harsh, northern accent, and her face betrayed little
emotion.

“You’re Ellen,” said he.

“Aye. I’m Ellen. You didn’t think I was Jane?”

She led the way into a narrow passage and then into the diminutive
parlour.

“Of course not,” said he. “Jane died three years ago. But you I haven’t
seen since I was a child.”

She looked him up and down: “Quite the gentleman.”

“I hope so. How’s mother?”

She gave the news dully. The sick woman had passed through the night
safely and was now asleep.

“She had made up her mind to see you before she died—she always was
strong willed—and that has kept her alive. Until I read your telegram I
didn’t think you would come.”

He flashed one of his quick glances. “Why not? This isn’t the first time
I’ve come to see her since my return. If I’ve made my way in the world,
that’s no reason for you to call me undutiful.”

“I don’t want to quarrel, John,” she said wearily. “Yes. I know about
your visits and the bit of money you send her. And she’s grateful, poor
soul.” She paused. Then: “You’ll be wanting breakfast.”

“Also a wash.”

“Are you too grand for the sink, or must you have hot water in your
room?”

“The sink will do. It will be less trouble for you.”

Alexis Triona followed her down the passage, and having washed himself
with a bit of yellow soap and dried himself on the coarse towel hung on
a stretch of string, went into the tidy kitchen, hung with cheap prints
and faded photographs of departed Briggses, his coat over his arm, and
conversed with his sister in his shirt sleeves while she fried the eggs
and bacon for his meal. His readiness to fall into the household ways
somewhat mollified her. Her mother had been full of pride in the great
man John had become, and she had expected the airs and graces of the
upstart. Living at Sunderland with her husband, a foreman riveter, and
her children, and going filially to Newcastle only once a year, she had
not met him on his previous visits. Now her mother’s illness had
summoned her three or four days before, when the neighbour’s daughter
who “did for” Mrs. Briggs, ordinarily a strong and active woman, found
the sudden situation beyond her powers and responsibility. So, until the
ailing lady discoursed to her of the paragon, she had scarcely given him
a thought for the sixteen years they had been separated. Her memories of
him as a child who alternated exasperating mischief with bone-idle fits
of reading had not endeared him to her practical mind; and when the
impish dreamer disappeared into the vast inane of foreign parts, and
when she herself was driven by she knew not what idiot romanticalism
into the grey worries of wifehood and motherhood, her consciousness
recorded the memory of a brother John, but whether he was alive or dead
or happy or miserable was a matter of illimitable unconcern. Now,
however, he had come to life, very vivid, impressing her with a certain
masterfulness in his manner which had nothing to do with the airs and
graces she despised. Yet she still regarded him with suspicion; even
when, seating himself at the roughly laid end of the kitchen table and
devouring bacon and eggs with healthy appetite, he enthusiastically
praised her cookery.

“What I can’t understand is,” she said, standing at the other end of the
table and watching him eat, “why the name of John Briggs isn’t good
enough for you.”

“It’s difficult to explain,” said he. “You see, I’ve written a book.
Have you read it?”

She regarded him scornfully. “Do you suppose, with a husband and seven
children I’ve time to waste on books? I’ve seen it,” she admitted.
“Mother has it bound in brown paper, by the side of her bed.”

“You must read it,” replied Triona, somewhat relieved. “Then you’ll see
why I’ve changed my name.” He laughed at her uncomprehending face. “I’ve
done nothing criminal, you know, and I’m not hiding from justice.”

“I suppose an outlandish name brings in more money,” she suggested
practically.

“That’s so,” said he.

“Fools must be fools.”

He acquiesced gladly, gauging the end of an embarrassing examination,
and turned the conversation to her domestic affairs.

Breakfast over, he lit a cigarette and watched her clear away, viewing
through the smoke the memories of his childhood. Just so, in that very
wooden arm-chair, though in another kitchen, used his father to sit,
pipe in mouth, while the women did the household work. It was all so
familiar, yet so far away. Between then and now stretched a lifetime—so
it seemed—of wide and romantic happenings. There, before him, on the
wall hung, as it did years ago, the haunting coloured print, cut from
some Christmas Number, of young Amyas Leigh listening to Salvation Yeo.
As a child, Salvation Yeo’s long arm and finger pointing out to sea had
been his inspiration. He had followed it, and gone to distant lands and
gone through the promised adventures, and had returned to the picture,
wondering whether all that had been was real and not the figment of a
dream.

A little later, after the doctor’s visit, he was admitted to his
mother’s room. For an hour or so he sat with her and gave a human being
deep happiness. In the afternoon she lost consciousness. For a day or
two she lingered on, and then she died.

During the dreary interval between his interview and the funeral, Alexis
Triona sat for many hours in his father’s chair, for the North was
smitten with a dismal spell of rain and tempest which discouraged
rambling out of doors, reconstructing his life, unweaving fact from
fiction, tearing aside the veils of self-deception wherein he had
enwrapped his soul. Surely there was some basis of fact in the romantic
history of Alexis Triona with which for the past year he had identified
himself. Surely a man could not dwell so intensely in an imaginary life
if none of it were real. Even while tearing open veils and viewing his
soul’s nakedness, he sought justification.

Did he not find it in that eagerness of spirit which had sent him, in
obedience to Salvation Yeo’s pointing finger, away from the dour and
narrow father and the first taste of the Tyneside works, penniless, over
the wild North Sea to Archangel, town of fairy wonders, and thence, so
as not to be caught on the ship again and taken back to Newcastle, to
wanderings he scarce knew whither? Did he not find it in the strange
lure of Russia which impelled him, when, after a few voyages, he landed
in the port of London, to procure a passport which would make him free
for the land of his fascination? Did he not find it in the
resourcefulness of brain which, the mariner’s life forsaken, first
secured him employment in the English racing establishment of a Russian
Prince, and then interested recognition by the Princess herself, so
that, after a strenuous while he found himself no longer as an
inconsiderable stable hand, but as a human being who counted in the
world? Did he not find it in his fond ambitions, when the Princess at
his request transferred him from stables to garage, from garage to
motor-works for higher training; when he set himself to learn Russian as
no Englishman should ever have learned it; when afterwards he steeped
his mind in Russian poetry and folk-lore, sleeping four or five hours a
night, compelled by dreams of greatness in which there figured as his
bride of the golden future the little Princess Tania, whose
governess-taught English was as pure as the church bells on a frosty
night? Did he not find it in those qualities of practical command of
circumstance and of poetic vision which had raised him in a few years
from the ragged, semi-ignorant, sea-faring English lout alone in Russia
to the trusted chief of a Prince’s fleet of a dozen cars, to the
courier-chauffeur, with all the roads and ways and customs and languages
of Russia, from Riga to Tobolsk, and from Tobolsk to Tiflis, and from
Tiflis to St. Petersburg, at his finger tips; to the Master of Russian
Literature, already something of a published poet, admitted into
intellectual companionship by the Prince and thereby given undreamed of
leisure for further intellectual development? What were those qualities
but the qualities of genius differentiating him from the ordinary run of
men and absolving him from such judgments as might be passed upon the
errant of them? Without this absolving genius could he have marched in
and taken his place in the modern world of English letters?

Meanwhile, being of frugal tastes, he had grown rich beyond the dream of
the Tyneside urchin’s avarice. He had visions of great motor-works, the
manufacture of an all-Russian car, built up by his own resources. The
princely family encouraged him. Negotiations had just begun—was his
story so devoid of truth?—when the great world cataclysm brought more
than his schemes for an all-Russian car toppling to the ground. The
Prince’s household was disintegrated; horses and cars were swallowed up
in the great convulsion.

He found himself driving generals around the shell-scarred front as a
volunteer, for being of British nationality he had not been called up
for military service. With them he served in advances and retreats and
saw battles and burnings like many millions of other men, but from the
comparative safety of a headquarters car. It was not until he ran into
the British Armoured Car Column that his patriotism took fire, and he
became a combatant in British uniform. He remained with the Column for
most of the campaign. Badly wounded towards the end, he was left in a
Russian hospital, a British naval rating. He remained there many months;
a bullet through his chest had missed a vital part and the wound had
soon healed, but his foot had gangrened, and only the star in which he
trusted had saved it from amputation. There was no fiction about the
three lost toes whose gap he had shown to Olifant.

So far did Alexis Triona, sitting in the kitchen arm-chair, salve his
conscience. In his story had he done more than remodel the contour of
fact? Beneath it did not the living essence of truth persist? Was he not
a highly educated man? Had he not consorted—before the cataclysm, and
later in the strangely filled hospital—with the young Russian
_intelligentsia_, who talked and talked and talked——? Who could know
better than he how Russia had floundered in their tempestuous ocean of
talk? And, finally, had he not gone, stout-hearted, through the perils
and hardships and exquisite sufferings of the cataclysm?

So far, so good. But what of the rest? For the rest, was not Fate
responsible?

The Revolution came, and Russian organization crumbled like a castle
touched with an enchanter’s wand. He went forth healed from the hospital
into chaos; Petrograd, where his little fortune lay, his objective.
Sometimes he found a foothold on an aimless train. Sometimes he jogged
weary miles in a peasant’s cart. Sometimes he walked. When he learned
that British uniform was no longer held in high esteem he changed to
peasant’s dress. So far his journey through revolutionary Russia was
true. But he had enough money in his pocket to keep him from want.

And then arrived the day which counted most in his life’s history, when
that which he had recounted to Olivia as a fantastic possibility
happened in sober fact.

He had been given to understand that if he walked to a certain junction
he might find a train returning to Petrograd. Tired, he sat by the
wayside, and undoing his wallet ate the black bread and dried fish which
he had procured at the last village. And, while eating, he became aware
of something gleaming in the rank grasses of the ditch—something long
and pallid and horrible. He slid down and found a dead man, stark naked,
lying on his back with the contused mark of a bullet hole in his chest.
A man of fifty, with short-cropped, grizzled hair and moustache, and
clear, refined features. He must have been dead two days. There he lay,
constricted of limb, stripped of everything that could mean warmth or
comfort or money to his murderers. The living man’s short experience
told him that such things were not uncommon in great revolutions. He was
about to leave the corpse—for what could he do?—when his eyes caught
the glint of metal a few feet away. It was a pocket compass. And further
on he found at intervals a toothbrush; a coverless, tattered copy of
Tacitus; a little faded snapshot of a woman mounted on cardboard; a
vulcanite upper plate of half a dozen false teeth; and a little fat book
with curling covers of American cloth. Had he continued his search he
might have found many other objects discarded by the robbers as useless.
But what was the good of pieces of conviction for a judicial enquiry
that would never take place? The little fat book, which on opening he
found to be manuscript in minute handwriting, he thrust in his pocket.
And so he went his way.

But on his way, his curiosity being aroused, he read in the little book
an absorbing diary of amazing adventures, of hardships and prison and
tortures unspeakable; and without a thought of its value, further than
its romantic fascination, he grew to regard it during his wanderings as
his most precious possession.

So far again, until he reached Riga, there was truth in the story of his
Russian traverse. Had he not prowled suspect about revolutionary
Petrograd? Had not the Prince and Princess, the idealized parents of the
story, been murdered and their wealth, together with his own few
thousand roubles, been confiscated? Was he not a fugitive? Indeed, had
he not seen the inside of a horrible prison? It is true that after a day
or two he managed by bribery to escape. But the essence of things was
there—the grain of fact which, under the sunlight of his genius,
expanded into the splendid growth of Truth. And his wit had served him,
too. His guards were for taking away the precious book. Knowing them to
be illiterate, he declared it to be the manuscript of his republican
poem. Challenged to read, he recited from memory verses of Shevchenko,
until they were convinced, not only of the book’s contents, but of his
own revolutionary opinions. This establishment of his orthodoxy,
together with a few roubles, assured his escape. And thence had he not
gone northwards, hungry and footsore?

And had he not been torpedoed? Cast ashore in shirt and trousers,
penniless? Was not the real truth of this adventure even more to his
credit than the fictitious narrative? For, a naval rating, he had
reported to a British man-of-war, and had spent months in a mine sweeper
in the North Sea, until the final catastrophe occurred. Then, after a
short time in hospital a kindly medical board found something wrong with
his heart and sent him out into the English world, a free man.

Yes. His real record was one that no man need be ashamed of. Why, then,
the fiction?

Sitting there in the uncompromising reality of his mother’s kitchen, he
strove for the first time to answer the question. He found an answer in
the obsession of the little book. During the scant leisure of his months
at sea it had been his breviary. More, it had been a talisman, a secret
scroll of enchantment which, wrapped in oilskin, never left his person,
save when, beneath the dim lamp of the fo’c’sle, he pored over it,
hunched up against a bulkhead. The spirit of the writer whom he had seen
dead and naked, seemed to have descended upon him. In the bitter watches
of the North Sea he lived through the dead man’s life with bewildering
intensity. There were times, so he assured himself, when it became a
conscious effort to unravel his own experiences from those of the dead
man. That he had not lived in remoter Kurdistan was unthinkable. And,
surely too, he had been tortured.

And when, in the attic in Cherbury Mews, impelled by irresistible force,
he began to write his fantasia of fact and imagination, the obsession
grew mightier. His pen was winged with flame.

“Why,” said he, half aloud, one day, staring into the kitchen fire, “why
should it not be a case of psychic obsession for which I am not
responsible?”

And that was the most comforting solution he could find.

There was none other. He moved uneasily, changing the crossing of his
legs, and threw a freshly rolled and lighted cigarette into the grate.
It was a case of psychic obsession. Otherwise he was a barefaced liar, a
worm to be despised by his fellow-men. How else to account for the
original lie direct, unreserved, to the publisher? Up to then he had no
thought of sailing through the world under false colours. He had to give
the mysterious dead man some identity. His own unconscious creative self
clamoured for expression. He had woven the dead man and himself into a
personality to which he had given the name of Alexis Triona. Naturally,
for verisimilitude, he had assumed “Alexis Triona” as a pen-name.
Besides, who would read a new book by one John Briggs? The publisher’s
first direct question was a blow between the eyes under which he reeled
for a few seconds. Then the romantic, the psychic, the whatever you will
of the artist’s touch of lunacy asserted itself, and John Briggs was
consumed in ashes and the Phœnix Alexis Triona arose in his stead. And
when the book appeared and the Phœnix leaped into fame, what could the
Phœnix do, for the sake of its ordinary credit, but maintain its
Phœnixdom?

Until now it had been the simplest matter in the world, seeing that he
half believed in it himself, seeing that the identification of the dead
man with himself was so complete, that his lies, even to himself, had
the generous air of conviction. But now, in the uncompromising John
Briggs-dom of his surroundings, things were different. The obsession
which still lingered when he bade Olivia adieu had vanished from his
spirit. He saw himself naked, a mere impostor. If his past found
absolution in the theory of psychic domination, his present was none the
less in a parlous state.

He had no more gone to Helsingfors in the last year’s autumn than he had
gone there now. What should John Briggs, obscure and demobilized able
seaman, have to do in Helsingfors? Why the elaborate falsehood? He
shrugged his shoulders and made a helpless gesture with his elbows. The
obsession again. The quietude of Medlow had got on his nerves. He had to
break away, to seek fresh environment. He had invented Helsingfors; it
was dramatic, in his romantic past; it kept up, in the direct mind of
Blaise Olifant, the mystery of Alexis Triona; and it gave him freedom.
He had spoken truth as to his vagabond humour. He loved the eternal
change of the broad highway. The Salvation Yeo inspiration had persisted
ever since he had run away from home to the El Dorado beyond the seas.
Had he been set down in a torpid household, no matter how princely,
sooner or later he would have revolted and have fled, smitten with the
wander madness. But the Prince, the nomadic Tartar atavism asserting
itself, suffered too much from this unrest; and in their mighty
journeyings through Russia, up and down, north and south, east and west,
and in the manifold adventures and excitements by the way, the young
chief mechanic found the needful satisfaction of his cravings. On
leaving Medlow he had started on a tramp, knapsack on back, to the north
of Scotland, stopping at his mother’s house, _en route_, and had reached
the John o’ Groats whither, on an eventful day, Olivia had professed
herself ready to accompany him. She had little guessed how well he knew
that long, long road. . . . Yet, when he met Blaise Olifant again, and
was forced to vague allusion to his mythical travels, he almost
persuaded himself that he had just arrived from Finland.

But now had come an irreparable shifting of psychological values. He
could not return to Olivia, eating her heart out for news of him, and
persuade himself that he had been to Helsingfors. The lie had been
facile enough. How else to account for his absence? His attendance at
his mother’s death-bed had been imperative: to disregard the summons had
never entered his mind. Yet simple avowal would have been pulling down
the keystone of the elaborate structure which, to her, represented
Alexis Triona. The parting lie had been easy: but the lie on his
return—the inevitable fabrication of imaginary travel—that would be
hatefully difficult. For the first time since he had loved her he was
smitten with remorse for his deception and with terror of her discovery.

He could not sleep of nights aching for her, shivering with dread at the
possibility of loss of her, picturing her alone in the sweet, wind-swept
house, utterly trustful and counting the long hours till he should come
again. Still, thank God, this was the last time they would be parted.
His mother had been the only link to his John Briggs past.

There were no testamentary complications, which he had somewhat feared.
His mother had only a life interest in the tiny estate which went, under
his father’s will, to his sister Ellen. And Ellen did not count.
Absorbed in her family cares, she would pass out of his life for ever
without thought of regret. It would be the final falsehood.

At breakfast, on the morning of the funeral, Ellen said suddenly, in her
dour way:

“I’ve been reading your book. It’s a pack of lies.”

“It would have been if I had signed it John Briggs,” he answered. “But
everything in it is true about Alexis Triona.”

“Your ways don’t seem to be our ways, John,” she remarked coldly.

He felt the words like a slap in the face. He flushed with anger.

“How dare you?”

“I’m sorry,” she answered. “I oughtn’t to have said it with mother lying
cold upstairs.”

He shrugged his shoulders, forced to accept the evasive apology. But her
challenge rankled. They parted stonily after the funeral, with the
perfunctory handshake.

“I don’t suppose I shall ever see you again.”

“It’s rather unlikely,” said he.

“Well, good-bye.”

“Good-bye.”

He threw himself back in the taxi-cab with a great sigh of relief. Thank
God the nightmare of the past few days was over. Now to awaken to the
real and wonderful things of life—the miraculous love of the dark-eyed,
quivering princess of his dreams: the work which since he had loved her
had grown into the sacred aim of their perfect lives.

And just as he had wired her from Newcastle announcing his sailing, so
did he wire her when he reached the railway station.

“Arrived. All well. Speeding straight to you with love and longing.”

Olivia smiled as she kissed the telegram. No one but her Alexis would
have used the word “speeding.”


                              CHAPTER XIV

SHE was waiting for him at the little South Coast station, where decorum
had to cloak the rapture of their meeting. But they sat close together,
hand in hand, in the hackney motor-car that took them home. This gave
him an intermediary breathing space for explanation; and the explanation
was easier than he had feared. Really, his journey had been almost for
nothing and had afforded little interest. The agent whom he was to
interview having been summoned back to Russia the day before he arrived,
he had merely delivered his dispatches to the British authorities and
taken the next boat to England. It was just a history of two dull sea
voyages. Nothing more was to be said about it, save that he would go on
no more fool’s errands for a haphazard government.

“Besides, it’s too dreadful to be away from you.”

“It has been awful for me, too,” said Olivia. “I never imagined what
real loneliness could feel like. All the time I thought of the poor
solitary little dab the Bryce children showed us the other day in the
biscuit-tin of water. Oh, I was the most forsaken little dab.”

He swore that she should never be lonely again; and, by the time they
reached their house by the sea, he had half-exultingly dismissed his
fictitious mission from his mind. All the apprehensions of the narrow
Northern kitchen melted in the joy of her. All danger had vanished like
a naughty black cloud sped to nothing by the sun. The mythical past had
to remain; but henceforward his life would be as clear to her as her own
exquisite life to him.

In their wind-swept home they gave themselves up to deferred raptures,
kissing and laughing after the foolish way of lovers. To grace his
return she had filled the rooms with flowers—roses and sweet
peas—which she bought extravagantly in the neighbouring seaside town.
The scent of them mingled delicately with the salt of the sea. To her
joy he was quick to praise them. She had wondered whether they would be
noticed by one so divinely careless of material things. He even found
delight in the meal which Myra served soon after their arrival—he so
indifferent to quality of food.

“Everything is you,” said he; “scent and taste and sight. You inform the
universe and give it meaning.”

Her eyes grew moist as she swiftly laid her hand on his.

“Am I really all that to you?” She laughed with a little catch in her
throat. “How can I live up to it?”

He raised her hand to his lips. “If only you went on existing like a
flower, your beauty and fragrance would be all in all to me. But you are
a flower with a bewildering soul. So you merely have to be as you are.”

He was in earnest. Women had played little or no part in his inner life,
which, for all his follies, had been lived on a spiritual plane. His
young ambitions had been irradiated by dreams of the little Princess
Tania, who had represented to him the ever-to-be-striven-for
unattainable. On his reaching the age when common sense put its clammy
touch on fervid imagination, the little Princess had been given away in
marriage to a young Russian nobleman of vast fortune, and he himself had
driven her to the wedding with naught but a sentimental pang. But the
flower-like, dancing, elusive quality of her had remained in his soul as
that which was only desirable and ever to be sought for in woman.
And—miracle of miracles!—he had found it in Olivia. And she was warm
and real, the glowing incarnation of the cold but perfect ghost of his
boyhood’s aspirations. She was verily the Princess of his dream come
true. And she had an odd air of the little Princess Tania—the same
dark, wavy hair and laughing eyes and the same crisp sweetness in her
English speech.

Save for all this rapture of meeting, they took up the thread of their
lives where it had been broken, as though no parting had taken place,
and their idyll continued to run its magic course. Triona began to write
again: some articles, a short story. The shadow shape of a new novel
arose in his mind, and, in his long talks with Olivia, gradually
attained coherence. This process of creation seemed to her uncanny.
Where did the people come from who at first existed as formless spirits
and then, in some strange way, developed into living things of flesh and
blood more real than the actual folk of her acquaintance? Her intimate
association with the novelist’s gift brought her nearer to him
intellectually, but at the same time set him spiritually on unattainable
heights. Meanwhile he called her his Inspiration, which filled her with
pride and content.

The lease of “Quien Sabe” all but expired before they had settled on
their future house. Medlow was ruled out. So was the immediate question
of the Medlow furniture, they having given Blaise Olifant another year’s
tenancy.

While discussing this step, he had said:

“It’s for you and you only to decide. Any spot on earth where you are is
good enough for me. By instinct I’m a nomad. If I hadn’t found you, I
should have gone away somewhere to the desert and lived in tents.”

Olivia, who had seen so little of the great world, felt a thrill of
pulses and put her hands on his shoulders—she was standing behind his
chair—

“Why shouldn’t we?”

He shook his head and glanced up at her. The way of the gipsy was too
hard for his English flower. She must dwell in her accustomed garden. In
practical terms, they must settle down for her sake. She protested. Of
herself she had no thought. He and his work were of paramount
importance. Had they not planned the ideal study, the central feature of
the house? He had laughed and mangled Omar. A pen and a block of paper
. . . and Thou beside me, etcetera, etcetera.

“I don’t believe you want to settle down a bit,” she cried.

He swung his chair and caught her round her slim body.

“Do you?”

“Eventually, of course——”

“But, before ‘eventually,’ don’t you want your wander-year?”

“France, Italy——” She became breathless.

“Honolulu, the Pacific, the wide world. Why should we tie ourselves to a
house until we have seen it all?”

“Yes, why? We have all our lives before us.” She sank on his knee. “How
beautiful! Let us make plans.”

So for the next few days they lived in a world of visions, catching
enthusiasm one from the other. Again he saw Salvation Yeo’s pointing
finger; and she, in the subconscious relation of her mind with his, saw
it too. House and furniture were Olifant’s as long as he wanted them.

“We’ll go round the world,” Olivia declared.

With a twirl of his finger—“Right round,” said he.

“Which way does one go?”

He was somewhat vague. An atlas formed no part of their personal
equipment or of the hireling penates of “Quien Sabe.”

“I’ll write to Cook’s.”

“Cook’s? My beloved, where is your sense of adventure?”

“We must go by trains and steamers, and Cook’s will tell us all about
them.”

She had her way. Cook’s replied. At the quotation for the minimum
aggregate of fares Alexis gasped.

“There’s not so much money in the world.”

“There is,” she flashed triumphantly. “On deposit at my bank. Much
more.”

Who was right now, she asked herself, she or the prosaic Mr. Trivett and
Mr. Fenmarch? She only had to dip her hands into her fortune and
withdraw them filled with bank-notes enough to take them half a dozen
times round the world!

Inspired by this new simplicity of things, they rushed up to London by
an incredibly early train to take tickets, then and there for the main
routes which circumnavigate the globe. The man at Cook’s dashed their
ardour. They would have to pencil their passages now and wait for months
until their turn on the waiting lists arrived.

It must be remembered that then were the early days of Peace.

“But we want to start next week!” cried Olivia in dismay.

The young man at Cook’s professed polite but wearied sorrow at her
disappointment. Forty times a day he had to disillusion eager souls who
wanted to start next week for the other side of the globe.

“It is most inconvenient and annoying for us to change our plans,”
Olivia declared resentfully. “But,” she added, with a smile, “it’s not
your fault that the world is a perfect beast. We’ll talk it over and
come to you again.”

So after lunch in town they returned to The Point, richer in their
knowledge of the conditions of contemporary world travel.

“We’ll put things in hand at once and start about Christmas,” said
Alexis. “Until then——”

“We’ll take a furnished flat in London,” Olivia decided.

                 *        *        *        *        *

October found them temporarily settled in a flat in the Buckingham
Palace Road, and then began the life which Olivia had schemed for her
husband before these disturbing dreams of vagabondage.

Towards the end of their stay in “Quien Sabe” various letters of enquiry
and invitations had been forwarded to Triona from people, back now in
London, with whom the success of his book had brought him into contact.
These, careless youth, he had been for ignoring, but the wiser Olivia
had stepped in and dictated tactful and informative replies. The result
was their welcome in many houses remote from the Lydian galley, the
Blenkiron home of Bolshevism and even the easy conservative dullness of
the circle of Janet Philimore. The world that danced and ate and dressed
and thought and felt to the unvarying rhythm of jazz music had passed
away like a burnt-up planet. The world which she entered with her
husband was astonishingly new with curious ramifications. At the houses
of those whose cultivated pleasure in life it is to bring together
people worthy of note she met artists, novelists, journalists, actors,
publishers, politicians, travellers, and their respective wives or
husbands. Jealously, at first, she watched the attitude of all these
folk towards her husband: in pride and joy she saw him take his easy
place among them as an equal. A minority of silly women flattered
him—to his obvious distaste—but the majority accepted him on frank and
honourable terms. She loved to watch him, out of the corner of her eye,
across the drawing-room, his boyish face flushed and eager, talking in
his swift, compelling way. His manners, so simple, so direct, so
different from the elaboration of Sidney Rooke, even from the
cut-and-dried convention of Mauregard, had a charm entirely individual.
There was no one like him in the world.

In their turn, many of the people of note they met at the houses of the
primary entertainers invited them to their homes. Thus, in a brief time,
Olivia found herself swept into as interesting a social circle as the
heart of ambitious young woman could crave. How far her own grace and
wit contributed to their success it never entered her head to enquire.

Triona, light-hearted, gave himself up to the pleasure of this new
existence. He found in it stimulus to work, being in touch with the
thought and the art of the moment. The newness of his Odyssey having
worn off, he was no longer compelled to dilate on his extraordinary
adventures; people, growing unconsciously impatient of the realistic
details of the late cataclysm, conspired to regard him more as a writer
than as a heroic personage; wherein he experienced mighty relief. He
could talk of other things than the habits of the dwellers round Lake
Baikal and the amenities of Bolshevik prisons. When conversation drifted
into such channels, he employed a craftiness of escape which he had
amused himself to develop. Freed from the obsession of the little black
book, he regarded his Russian life as a phase remote, as a tale that was
told. His facile temperament put the whole matter behind him. He lived
for the future, when he should be the acknowledged English Master of
Romance, and when Olivia’s burning faith in his genius should be
justified. He threw off memories of Ellen and the kitchen chair and went
his way, a man radiant with happiness. Each day intensified the wonder
of his wife. From the lips and from the writings of fools and
philosophers he had heard of the perils of the first year of marriage;
of the personal equations that seemed impossible of simultaneous
solution; of the misunderstandings, cross-purposes, quarrels inevitable
to the attempt; of the hidden snags of feminine unreason that
shipwrecked logical procedure; of the love-rasping persistence of tricks
of manner or speech which either had to be violently broken or to be
endured in suffering sullenness. At both fools and philosophers he
mocked. A fiction, this dogma of inescapable sex warfare. Never for a
second had a cloud arisen on their horizon. The flawlessness of Olivia
he accepted as an axiom. Equally axiomatic was his own faultiness. In
their daily lives he was aware of his thousand lapses from her standard
of grace, when John Briggs happened to catch Alexis Triona at unguarded
moments and threw him from his seat. But, in a flash, the instinctive,
the super-instinctive, the nothing less than Divine hand, was stretched
out to restore him to his throne. As a guide to conduct she became his
conscience.

Work and love and growing friendship filled his care-free days. His
novel was running serially in a weekly and attracting attention. It
would be published in book-form early in the New Year, and the
publishers had no doubt of its success. All was well with the world.

Meanwhile they concerned themselves busily, like happy children, with
their projects of travel. It was a great step to book berths for Bombay
by a January boat. They would then cross India, visit Burmah, the
Straits Settlements, Australia, Japan, America. All kinds of Companies
provided steamers; Providence would procure the accommodation. They
planned a detailed six months’ itinerary which would take a
conscientious globe-trotter a couple of years to execute. Before
launching on this eastern voyage they would wander at their ease through
France, see Paris and Monte Carlo, and pick up the boat at Marseilles.
As the year drew to its close their excitement waxed more unrestrained.
They babbled to their envious friends of the wonder-journey before them.

Blaise Olifant, who, on his periodical visits to London, was a welcome
visitor at their flat, was entertained with these anticipations of
travel. He listened with the air of elderly indulgence that had been his
habit since their marriage.

“Don’t you wish you were coming with us?” asked Olivia.

He shook his head. “Don’t you remember the first time I saw you I said I
was done with adventures?”

“And I said I was going in search of them.”

“So you’re each getting your heart’s desire,” said Triona.

“Yes, I suppose so,” replied Olifant, with a smile.

There was a touch of sadness in it which did not escape Olivia’s shrewd
glance. He had grown thinner during the year; his nose seemed
half-comically to have grown sharper and longer. In his eyes dwelt a
shadow of wistful regret.

“The life of a hermit cabbage isn’t good for you,” she said. “Give it up
and come with us.”

Again he shook his head. No. They did not want such a drag on the wheels
of their joyous chariot. Besides, he was tied to Medlow as long as she
graciously allowed him to live there. His sister had definitely left her
dissolute husband and was living under his protection.

“You should be living under the protection of a wife,” Olivia declared.
“I’ve told you so often, haven’t I?”

“And I’ve always answered that bachelors are born, not made—and I’m one
born.”

“Predestination! Rubbish!” cried Triona, rising with a laugh. “Your
Calvinistic atavism is running away with you. It’s time for your
national antidote. I’ll bring it in.”

He went out of the room, in his boyish way, in search of whisky. Olivia
leaned forward in her chair.

“You may not know it, but from that first day a year ago you made
yourself a dear friend—so you’ll forgive me if I——” She paused for a
second, and went on abruptly: “You’ve changed. Now and then you look so
unhappy. I wish I could help you.”

He laughed. “It’s very dear of you to think of me, Lady Olivia—but the
change is not in me. I’ve remained the same. It’s your eyes that have
grown so accustomed to the radiant gladness of a happy man that they
expect the same in any old fossil on the beach.”

“Now you make me feel utterly selfish,” she cried.

“How?”

“We oughtn’t to look so absurdly happy. It’s indecent.”

“But it does one good,” said he.

Triona entered with the tray, and administered whisky and soda to his
guest.

“There! When you’ve drunk it you’ll be ready to come to the Magical
Isles with us, where the Lady of Ladies awaits you in an enchanted
valley, with hybiscus in her hair.”

The talk grew light, drifted inevitably into the details of their
projected wanderings. The evening ended pleasantly. Olivia bade Olifant
farewell, promising, as he would not go in search of her himself, to
bring him back the perfect lady of the hybiscus crown. Triona
accompanied him to the landing; and, while they stood awaiting the lift,
Olifant said casually:

“I suppose you’ve got your passports?”

“Passports?” The young man knitted his brow in some surprise. “Why, of
course. That’s to say, I’ve not bothered about them yet, but they’ll be
all right. Why do you ask?”

“You’re Russian subjects. There may be difficulties. If there are, I
know a man in the Foreign Office who may be of help.”

The lift rose and the gates clashed open, and the attendant came out.

“Thanks very much,” said Triona. “It’s awfully good of you.”

They shook hands, wished each other God-speed, and the cage went down,
leaving Triona alone on the landing, gaping across the well of the lift.

He was aroused from a semi-stupor by Olivia’s voice at the flat door.

“What on earth are you doing, darling?”

He realized that he must have been there some appreciable time. He
turned with a laugh.

“I was interested in the mechanism of the lift; it has so many
possibilities in fiction.”

She laughed. “Think of them to-morrow. It’s time for good little
novelists to go to bed.”

But that night, while Olivia, blissfully unconscious of trouble, slept
the happy sleep of innocence Alexis Triona did not close an eye.

Passports! He had not given them a thought. Any decent person was
entitled to a passport. In the plenitude of his English content he had
forgotten his fictitious Russian citizenship. To attest or even to
support this claim there was no creature on God’s earth. The details of
his story of the torpedoed Swedish timber boat in which he had taken
refuge would not bear official examination. Application for passport
under the name of Alexis Triona, soi-disant Russian subject, would
involve an investigation leading to inevitable exposure. His civic
status was that of John Briggs, late naval rating. He had all his papers
jealously locked up, together with the little black notebook, in his
despatch case. As John Briggs, British subject, he was freeman of the
civilized world. But John Briggs was dead and done for. It was
impossible to wander over the globe as Alexis Triona with a passport
bearing the name of John Briggs. He would be held up and turned back at
any frontier. And it was beyond his power of deception to induce Olivia
to travel with him round the world under the incognito of Mrs. John
Briggs.

Rigid, so that he should not wake the beloved woman, he stared for hours
and hours into the darkness, vainly seeking a solution. And there was
none.

He might blind Olivia into the postponement of their adventure, and in
the meanwhile change his name by deed poll. But that would involve the
statutory publicity in the Press. The declaration in _The Times_ that
he, John Briggs, would henceforth take the name of Alexis Triona would
stultify him in the social and literary world—and damn him in the eyes
of Olivia.

In those early days after the War, the Foreign Office granted passports
grudgingly. British subjects had to show very adequate reasons for
desiring to go abroad, and foreign visas were not over-readily given. In
the process of obtaining a passport, a man’s identity had to be
established beyond question.

He remembered now having heard vague talk of spies; but he had paid no
attention to it. Now he realized that which he had heard was cruelly
definite.

There was no solution. John Briggs was dead, and Alexis Triona had no
official existence.

He could not get as far as Boulogne, let alone Japan. And there was
Olivia by his side dreaming of the Fortunate Isles.


                               CHAPTER XV

BUT for Olivia’s unquestioning faith in him he would not have pulled
through this passport quagmire. At every fresh lie he dreaded lest her
credulity should reach the breaking point. For he had to lie once
more—and this time with revulsion and despair.

He began the abominable campaign the next evening after dinner. He had
been absent all day, on the vague plea of business. In reality he had
walked through London and wandered about the docks, Ratcliffe Highway,
the Isle of Dogs. He had returned physically and spiritually worn out.
Her solicitude smote him. It was nothing. A little worry which the sight
of her would dispel. They dined and went into the drawing-room. She sat
on the arm of his chair.

“And now the worry, poor boy. Anything I can do?”

He stared into the fire. “It’s our trip.”

“Why, what has gone wrong?”

“Everything,” he groaned.

“But, darling!” She gripped his shoulder. “What do you mean?”

“I’m afraid it’s a beautiful dream, my dear. We must call it off.”

She uttered a breathless “Why?”

“It’s far beyond our means.”

She broke into her gay laugh and hugged him and called him a silly
fellow. Hadn’t they settled all that side of it long ago? Her fingers
were itching to draw cheques. She had scarcely put pen to pink paper
since their marriage. Hadn’t he insisted on supporting her?

“And I’ll go on insisting,” said he. “I’m not the man to live on my
wife’s money. No, no——” with uplifted hand he checked her generous
outburst. “I know what you’re going to say, sweetheart, but it can’t be
done. I was willing for you to advance a certain amount. But I would
have paid it back—well, I would have accepted it if it gave you
pleasure. Anyhow, things are different now. Suddenly different.”

He writhed under the half-truths, the half-sincerities he was speaking.
In marrying her his conscience absolved him of fortune seeking. It had
been the pride of his Northumbrian blood to maintain his wife as she
should be maintained, out of his earnings—this draft on her fortune for
the jaunt he had made up a Tyneside mind to repay. Given the passport,
the whole thing was as simple as signing a cheque. But no passports to
be given, he had to lie. How else, in God’s name, to explain?

“My dear,” said he, in answer to her natural question, “there’s one
thing about myself I’ve not told you. It has seemed quite unimportant.
In fact, I had practically forgotten it. But this is the story. During
my last flight through Russia a friend, one of the old Russian nobility,
gave me shelter. He was in hiding, dressed as a peasant. His wife and
children had escaped the Revolution and were, he was assured, in
England. He entrusted me with a thousand pounds in English bank-notes
which he had hidden in a scapulary hanging round his neck, and which I
was to give to his family on my arrival. I followed his example and hung
the few paper roubles I had left, together with his money, round my
neck. As you know, I was torpedoed. I was hauled out of the water in
shirt and drawers, and landed penniless. The string of the scapulary had
broken, and all the money was at the bottom of the North Sea. I went to
every conceivable Russian agency in London to get information about the
Vronsky family. There was no trace of them. I came to the conclusion
that they had never landed in England, and to-day I found I was right.
They hadn’t. They had disappeared off the face of the earth.”

“To-day?” queried Olivia.

“This morning. I had a letter from Vronsky forwarded by the publishers.”

“Why didn’t you tell me?” cried Olivia. “I had an idea you weren’t quite
yourself.”

“I didn’t want to worry you without due reason,” he explained, “and I
was upset. It was like a message from the dead. For, not having heard of
him all this time, I concluded he had perished, like so many others, at
the hands of the Bolsheviks. Anyhow, there he was alive in a little
hotel in Bloomsbury. Of course, I had to go and rout him out.”

“Naturally,” said Olivia.

“Well, I found him. He had managed to escape, with the usual
difficulties, and was now about to search Europe for his family.”

“What a terrible quest,” said Olivia, with a shudder.

“Yes. It’s awful, isn’t it?” replied Triona in a voice of deep
feeling—already half beginning himself to believe in the genuineness of
his story—“I spent a heart-rending day with him. He had expected to
find his family in England.”

“But you wrote to him——”

“Of course. But how many letters to Russia reach their destination?
Their letters, too, have miscarried or been seized. He hadn’t had news
of them since they left Petrograd.”

Carried away by the tragedy of this Wandering Jew hunt for a lost
family, Olivia forgot the reason for its recital. She questioned, Triona
responded, his picturesque invention in excited working. He etched in
details. Vronsky’s declension from the ruddy, plethoric gentleman, with
good-humoured Tartar face, to the gaunt, hollow-eyed grey-beard, with
skinny fingers on which the nails grew long. The gentle charm of the
lost Madame Vronsky and the beauty of her two young daughters, Vera and
Sonia. The faithful moujik who had accompanied them on their way and
reported that they had sailed on the _Olger Danske_ from Copenhagen for
London. He related their visit to Lloyds, where they had learned that no
such ship was known. Certainly at the time of the supposed voyage it had
put into no British port. Vronsky was half mad. No wonder.

“Why did you leave him? Why didn’t you bring him here?” asked Olivia,
her eyes all pity and her lips parted.

“I asked him. He wouldn’t come. He must begin his search at once—take
ship for Denmark. . . . Meanwhile, dearest,” he said after a pause,
“being practically without resources, he referred to his thousand
pounds. That’s where you and I come in. He entrusted me with the money
and the accident of losing it could not relieve me of the
responsibility—could it?”

He glanced a challenge. Her uprightness waved it aside.

“Good heavens, no!”

“Well, I took him to my bank and gave him the thousand pounds in Bank of
England notes. So, my dear, we’re all that to the bad on our balance
sheet. We’re nearly broke—and we’ll have to put off our trip round the
world to more prosperous times.”

Although, womanlike, she tried at first to kick against the pricks,
parading the foolish fortune lying idle at the bank, that was the end of
the romantic project. Her common sense asserted itself. A thousand
pounds, for folks in their position, was a vast sum of money. She
resigned herself with laughing grace to the inevitable, and poured on
her husband all the consolation for disappointment that her heart could
devise. Their pleasant life went on. Deeply interested in Vronsky, she
questioned him from time to time. Had he no news of the tragic wanderer?
At last, in February, he succumbed to the temptation to finish for ever
with these Frankenstein monsters. He came home one afternoon, and after
kissing her said with a gay air:

“I found a letter at Decies Street”—the house of his publishers—“from
whom do you think? From Vronsky. Just a few lines. He tracked his family
to Palermo and they’re all as happy as can be. How he did it he doesn’t
say, which is disconcerting, for one would like to know the ins and outs
of his journeyings. But there’s the fact, and now we can wipe Vronsky
off our slate.”

In March the novel appeared. Reviewers lauded it enthusiastically as a
new note in fiction.

The freshness of subject, outlook, and treatment appealed to the vastly
superior youth, the disappointed old, and the scholarly and
conscientious few, who write literary criticism. The great firm of
publishers smiled urbanely. Repeat orders on a gratifying scale poured
in every day. Triona took Olivia to Decies Street to hear from
publishing lips the splendid story. They went home in a taxi-cab, their
arms around each other, intoxicated with the pride of success and the
certainty of their love. And the next day Olivia said:

“If we can’t go round the world, at any rate let us have a holiday. Let
us go to Paris. We can afford it.”

And Triona, who for months had foreseen such a reasonable proposal,
replied:

“I wish we could. I’ve been dreaming of it for a long time. In fact—I
didn’t tell you—but I went to the Foreign Office a fortnight ago.”

She wrinkled her brow.

“What’s the Foreign Office got to do with it?”

“They happen to regard me as an exceptional man, my dearest,” said he.
“I’m still in the Secret Service. I tried last summer to get out of
it—but they overpersuaded me, promising not to worry me unduly. One
can’t refuse to serve one’s country at a pinch, can one?”

“No. But why didn’t you tell me?”

She felt hurt at being left out in the cold. She also had a sudden fear
of the elusiveness of this husband of hers, hero of so many strange
adventures and interests that years would not suffice for their complete
revelation. She remembered the dug-up Vronsky romance, in itself one
that might supply the ordinary human being with picturesque talk for a
lifetime. And now she resented this continued association with the
Foreign Office which he thought he had severed on his return from
Finland.

“I never imagined they would want me again, after what I told them. But
it seems they do. You know the state of things in Russia. Well—they may
send me or they may not. At any rate, for the next few months I am not
to leave the country.”

“I call that idiotic,” cried Olivia indignantly. “They could get at you
in Paris just as easily as they could in London.”

“They’ve got the whip hand, confound them,” replied Triona. “They grant
or refuse passports.”

“The Foreign Office is a beast!” said Olivia. “I’d like to tell them
what I think of them.”

“Do,” said he with a laugh, “but don’t tell anybody else.”

She believed him. He breathed again. The difficulty was over for the
present. Meanwhile he called himself a fool for not having given her
this simple explanation months ago. Why had he racked his conscience
with the outrageous fiction of the Vronskys?

About this time, too, in her innocence, she raised the question of his
technical nationality. It was absurd for him to continue to be a Russian
subject. A son of English parents, surely he could easily be
naturalized. He groaned inwardly at this fresh complication, and cursed
the name of Triona. He put her off with vague intentions. One of these
days . . . there was no great hurry. She persisted.

“It’s so unlike you,” she declared, uncomprehending. “You who do things
so swiftly and vividly.”

“I must have some sort of papers establishing my identity,” he
explained. “My word won’t do. We must wait till there’s a settled
government in Russia to which I can apply. I know it’s an unsatisfactory
position for both; but it can’t be helped.” He smiled wearily. “You
mustn’t reproach me.”

“Reproach you—my dearest——?”

The idea shocked her. She only had grown impatient of the intangible
Russian influences that checked his freedom of action. Sometimes she
dreaded them, not knowing how deep or how sinister they might be. Secret
agents were sometimes mysteriously assassinated. He laughed at her
fears. But what else, she asked herself, could he do but laugh? She was
not reassured.

The naturalization question settled for an indefinite time, he felt once
more in clear water. Easter came and went.

“If I don’t move about a little, I shall die,” he said.

“Let us move about a lot,” said Olivia. “Let us hire a car and race
about Great Britain.”

He waxed instantly enthusiastic. She was splendid. Always the audacious
one. A car—a little high-powered two-seater. Just they two together.
Free of the high road! If they could find no lodgings at inns they could
sleep beneath the hedges. They would drive anywhere, losing their way,
hitting on towns with delicious unexpectancy. The maddest motor tour
that was ever unplanned.

In the excitement of the new idea, the disappointment over the
prohibited foreign travel vanished from their hearts. Once more they
contemplated their vagabondage, with the single-mindedness of children.

“We’ll start to-morrow,” he declared.

“To-morrow evening is the Rowingtons’ dinner-party,” Olivia reminded
him.

He confounded Rowington and his dinner-party. Why not send a telegram
saying he was down with smallpox? He hated literary dinner-parties. Why
should he make an ass of himself in a lion’s skin—just to gratify the
vanity of a publisher? Olivia administered the required corrective.

“Isn’t it rather a case of the lion putting on an ass’s skin, my dear?
Of course we must go.”

He laughed. “I suppose we must. Anyway, we’ll start the day after. I’ll
see about the car in the morning.”

He went out immediately after breakfast, and in a couple of hours
returned radiant. He was in luck, having found the high-powered
two-seater of his dreams. He overwhelmed her with enthusiastic
technicalities.

“You beloved infant,” said Olivia.

But before they could set out in this chariot of force and speed,
something happened. It happened at the dinner-party given by Rowington,
the active partner in the great publishing house, in honour of their
twice-proved successful author.

The Rowingtons lived in a mansion at the southern end of Portland Place.
It had belonged to his father and grandfather before him and the house
was filled with inherited and acquired treasures. On entering, Triona
had the same sense of luxurious comfort as on that far-off day of the
first interview in Decies Street, when his advancing foot stepped so
softly on the thick Turkey carpet. A manservant relieved him of his coat
and hat, a maid took Olivia for an instant into a side-room whence she
reappeared bare-necked, bare-armed, garbed, as her husband whispered, in
cobweb swept from Heaven’s rafters. A manservant at the top of the
stairs announced them. Mrs. Rowington, thin, angular, pince-nez’d, and
Rowington, middle-aged, regarding the world benevolently through gold
spectacles, received them and made the necessary introduction to those
already present. There was a judge of the High Court, a well-known
novelist, a beautiful and gracious woman whom Olivia, with a little
catch of the heart, recognized as the Lady Aintree who had addressed a
passing word of apology to her in the outgoing theatre crush in the
first week of her emancipation. She envied Alexis who stood in talk with
her. She herself was trying to correlate the young and modern bishop, in
plum-coloured evening dress, with the billow of lawn semi-humanized by a
gaunt staring head and a pair of waxen hands which had gone through the
dimly comprehended ritual of her confirmation.

He explained his presence in this brilliant assembly on the ground that
once he had written an obscure book of travels in Asia Minor. St. Paul’s
steps retraced. He had fought with beasts at Ephesus—but not of the
kind to which the apostle was presumed to refer; disgusting little
beasts! He also swore “By Jove!” which she was sure her confirming
bishop would never have done.

A while later, as the room was filling up, she found herself talking to
a Colonel Onslow, an authority on Kurdistan, said her hostess, who was
anxious to meet her husband. She glanced around, her instinctive habit,
to place Alexis. He had been torn from Lady Aintree and was standing
just behind her by the chimney-piece in conversation with a couple of
men. His eyes caught the message of love in hers and telegraphed back
again.

He no longer confounded Rowington. The central figure of this
distinguished gathering, he glowed with the divine fire of success. He
was talking to two elderly men on Russian folk literature. On that he
was an authority. He knew the inner poignancy of every song, the bitter
humour of every tale. Speaking sober truth about Russia he forgot that
he had ever lied.

Suddenly into the little open space about the hearth emerged from the
throng, a brisk, wiry man with a keen, clean-shaven, weather-beaten
face, who, on catching sight of Triona, paused for a startled second and
then darted up to him with outstretched hand; and Triona, taken off his
guard, made an eager step to meet him.

If, for two days, you have faced death alone with a man who has given
every proof of indomitable courage and cheerfulness, your heart has an
abominable way of leaping when suddenly, years afterwards, you are
brought with him face to face.

“You are Briggs! I knew I was right. Fancy running up against you here!”

Triona’s cheeks burned hot. The buried name seemed to be shrieked to the
listening universe. At any rate, Olivia heard; and instinctively she
drifted from the side of Colonel Onslow towards Alexis.

“It’s a far cry from Russia,” he said.

“Yes, and a far cry from the lower deck of an armoured car,” laughed the
other. “Well, I am glad to see you. God knows what has happened to the
rest of us. I’ve been one of the lucky ones. Got a ship soon afterwards.
Retired now. Farming. Living on three pigs and a bee. And you”—he
clapped him on the shoulder—“you look flourishing. I used to have an
idea there was something behind you.”

It was then that Triona became conscious of Olivia at his elbow. He put
on a bold face and laughed in his careless way.

“I have my wife behind me. My dear—this is Captain Wedderburn. We met
in Russia.”

“We did more than meet, by George!” cried Wedderburn breezily. “We were
months together in the Column——”

“What Column?” asked Olivia, puzzled.

“The Armoured Car Column. I forget what the humour of war rated him as.
Able Seaman, I think. I was Lieutenant then. It was a picnic, I assure
you. And there were the days—he and I alone together—I’ll never forget
’em—we got cut off—but he has told you all about it.”

“No.”

“My dear Mrs. Briggs——”

“Pardon me,” Alexis interrupted hastily. “But that’s not my name. It was
literally a _nom de guerre_. My real name is Triona.”

“Eh?” Wedderburn put his hands on his narrow hips and stared at him.
“The famous chap I was asked to meet to-night? Mrs. Triona, your husband
is a wonderful fellow. The months that were the most exciting time in my
life, anyhow, he hasn’t thought it worth while mentioning in his book.
And yet”—his keen eyes swept like searchlights over the other’s
face—“you were knocked out. I remember the day. And you must have been
a long time in hospital. How the deuce did you manage to work everything
in?”

“I was only scratched,” said Triona. “A week or two afterwards I was
back in the Russian service.”

“I see,” said Wedderburn with unexpected frostiness.

He turned to greet a woman of his acquaintance standing near, and
husband and wife were left for a few seconds alone.

“You never told me about serving with the British forces.”

“It was just an interlude,” said he.

The hostess came up and manœuvred them apart. Dinner was announced. The
company swept downstairs. Olivia sat between her host and Colonel
Onslow, Lady Aintree opposite, and next her, Captain Wedderburn. For the
first time in her married life Olivia suffered vague disquiet as to her
husband’s antecedents. The rugged-faced, bright-eyed man on the other
side of the table seemed to hold the key to a phase of his life which
she had never heard. She wished that he were seated elsewhere, out of
sight. It was with a conscious effort that she brought herself to listen
intelligently to her host who was describing his first meeting with the
now famous Alexis Triona, then valiantly driving hireling motor-cars
under the sobriquet of John Briggs. She felt a touch of ice at her
heart. For the second time that night she had heard the unfamiliar name.
Alexis had told her, it is true, of his early struggles in London while
writing _Through Blood and Snow_, but of John Briggs he had breathed no
word.

The talk drifted into other channels until she turned to her neighbour,
Colonel Onslow, who after a while said pleasantly:

“I’m looking for an opportunity of a chat with your husband, Mrs.
Triona. From his book, he seems to have covered a great deal of my
ground—and it must have been about the same time. It’s strange I never
came across him.”

“I don’t think so,” she replied. “His Secret Service work rather
depended on his avoidance of other European agents.”

Colonel Onslow yielded laughingly to the argument. Of course, that was
quite understandable. Every man had his own methods. No game in the
world had more elastic rules.

“On the other hand, I knew a Russian on exactly the same lay as your
husband, a fellow Krilov, a fine chap—I ran into him several times—who
was rather keen on taking me into his confidence. And one or two of the
things he told me were so identical with your husband’s experiences,
that it seems they must have hunted in couples.”

“Oh, no, he was on his own, I assure you,” said Olivia.

“Anyhow, I’m keen to meet him,” said Onslow, unaware of the growing fear
behind the girl’s dark eyes. “I only came home a month ago. Somebody
gave me the book. When I read it I went to my friend Rowington and asked
about Alexis Triona. That’s how I’m here.”

Presently, noticing her air of constraint, he said apologetically, “You
must be fed up with all this ancient history. A wanderer like myself is
apt to forget that the world is supposed to be at peace and is even
rather bored with making good the damage of war.”

Olivia answered as well as she could, and for the rest of the
interminable meal strove to exhibit her usual gay interest in the talk
around.

But her heart was heavy with she knew not what forebodings. She could
not see Alexis, who was seated on the same side and at the other end of
the long table. She felt as though the benevolent gold-spectacled man
had deliberately convened an assembly of Alexis’s enemies. It was a
blessed relief when the ladies rose and left the men; but in the
drawing-room, although she was talking to Lady Aintree, most winningly
gracious of women, her glance continuously sought the door by which the
men would enter. And when they came in his glance, for the first time in
their married life, did not seek or meet hers. She scanned his face
anxiously. It was pale and drawn, she thought, and into his eyes had
crept the furtive look of a year ago which happiness, she thought, had
dispelled for ever. He did not come near her; nor did Wedderburn and
Onslow; nor did the two latter talk to him; he was swallowed up in a
little group at the further end of the room. Meanwhile, the most
up-to-date thing in bishops sank smilingly into a chair by her side, and
ridden by some ironical Imp of the Inapposite described to her a visit,
in the years past, to the Castle of Schwöbbe in Hanover, where dwelt the
Baron von Munchausen, the lineal descendant of the famous liar. A
mythical personage? Not a bit. Munchausen was one of Frederick the
Great’s generals. He had seen his full-length portrait in the Rittersaal
of the old Schloss. Thence he began to discourse on the great liars of
travel. Herodotus, who was coming more and more into his own as a
faithful historian; John Mandeville; Fernando Mendez Pinto, a name now
forgotten, but for a couple of centuries a byword of mendacity; Gemelli
Carreri, the bed-ridden Neapolitan author of a _Voyage Round the World_;
the Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela who claimed to have ridden a hippogriff to
the tomb of Ezekiel; George Psalmanazar, who captivated all London
(including so level-headed a man as Samuel Johnson) with his history of
the Island of Formosa and his grammar of the Formosan language; de
Rougemont, the turtle-riding impostor of recent years; and the later
unfortunate gentleman whose claim to have discovered the North Pole was
so shockingly discredited. The bishop seemed to have made a hobby of
these perverters of truth and to look on them (as in theological duty
bound), wriggling through the lake of fire and brimstone, in the light
of Izaak Walton’s counsel concerning the worms threaded on the hook, as
if he loved them. Then there were the notorious Blank and Dash and Dot,
still living. Types, said he, of the defective criminal mind, by mere
chance skirting round the commonly recognized area of crime.

Olivia, with nerves on edge, welcomed the matronly swoop of Mrs.
Rowington.

“My dear Bishop, I want to introduce you——”

He rose, made a courtly bow to Olivia.

“I’ll read your lordship’s next book of travel with great interest,” she
said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

As the home-bound taxi drove off:

“Thank goodness that’s over,” said Triona.

She echoed with a sigh: “Yes, thank goodness.”

“All the bores of the earth.”

“Did you have a talk with Colonel Onslow?” she asked.

“The biggest of the lot. I’m sick to death of the Caucasus,” he added
with unusual irritation. “I wish I had never been near it. I hate these
specially selected dinner parties of people you don’t want to meet and
will never meet again.” He took her hand, which was limp and
unresponsive. “Did you have a rotten time, too?”

“I wish we hadn’t gone,” she replied, withdrawing her hand under the
pretext of pulling her cloak closer round her shoulders.

He rolled and lit a cigarette and smoked gloomily. At last he said with
some impatience:

“Of course, I didn’t mention the little episode with the British Force.
It would have been out of the picture. Besides, nothing very much
happened. It was a stupid thing to do—I had no right. That’s why I took
an assumed name—John Briggs.”

“And you used it when you landed in England. Mr. Rowington told me.”

“Of course, dear. Alexis Triona, chauffeur, would have been absurd,
wouldn’t it?” He turned to her with the old eagerness.

This time it was she who thrust out a caressing hand, suddenly feeling a
guilty horror of the doubts that had beset her.

“I wish you would tell me everything about yourself—the details you
think so unimportant. Then I wouldn’t be so taken aback as I was this
evening, when Captain Wedderburn called me Mrs. Briggs.”

“I’ll write you a supplementary volume,” said he, “and it shall be
entitled _Through Love and Sunshine_.”

The ring in his voice consoled her. He drew her close to him and they
spoke little till they reached their house. There, in the dining-room,
he poured out a stiff whisky-and-soda and drank it off at a gulp. She
uttered a startled, “My dear!” at the unusual breach of abstemious
habit.

“I’m dog-tired,” said he. “And I’ve things to do before I go to bed.
Don’t wait for me.”

“What things?”

“To-night has given me an idea for a story. I must get it, dear, and put
it down; otherwise—you know—I shan’t sleep.”

She protested. His brain would be fresher in the morning. Such untimely
artistic accouchment had, indeed, happened several times before, and,
unless given its natural chances had occasioned a night of unrest; but
never before had there been this haggardness in his face and eyes. Again
the doubts assailed her. Something that evening had occurred to throw
him off his balance.

“If anything’s worrying you, dear, do tell me,” she urged, her clasp on
the lapels of his dress-coat and her eyes searching his.

He took her wrists, kissed her, and laughed, as she thought, uneasily.
Worries? He hadn’t an anxiety in the world. But this idea—it was the
germ of something big. He must tackle it then and there. Led, his arm
around her body, to the door, she allowed herself to be convinced.

“Don’t be too long.”

“And you go to sleep. You must be tired.”

Left alone, Triona poured himself out another whisky and soda. In one
evening he had suffered two shocks, for neither of which his easy nature
had prepared him. The Wedderburn incident he could explain away. But
from the blind alley into which he was pinned by Colonel Onslow, there
had been but a horrible wriggling escape. It was a matter, too, more
spiritual even than material. He felt as though he had crawled through a
sewer.

He went to his desk by the window, and from a drawer took out his
despatch case, which he unlocked with the key that never left his
person; and from it he drew the little black book. There, half-erased,
in pencil on the reverse of the cover, was the word, in Russian
characters, “Krilov.” Hitherto he had regarded this as some unimportant
memorandum of name or place. It had never occurred to him that it was
the name of the owner of the diary. But now, it stared at him accusingly
as the signature of the dead man whose soul, as it were, he had robbed.

Krilov. There was no doubt about it. Onslow had known him, that
fine-featured grizzled-haired dead man, in his vehement life. He had
heard from his lips the wild adventures which he had set down with such
official phlegm in the little black book, and which he, Alexis Triona,
had credited to himself, and had invested with the wealth of his poet’s
imagination. Of course, he had lied, on his basis of truth, to Colonel
Onslow, disclaimed all knowledge of Krilov. It had been the essence of
the old Russian régime that secret agents should have no acquaintance
one with another. It was a common thing for two men, unsuspectingly, to
be employed on an identical mission. The old Imperial service depended
on this system of checks. If the missions were identical, the various
incidents were bound to be similar. He had defended his position with
every sophistical argument his alert brain could devise. He drew, as red
herrings across the track, the names of obscure chieftains known to
Colonel Onslow, whom he had not mentioned in his book; described
them—one long-nosed, foxy, pitted with smallpox; another obese and
oily; to Colonel Onslow’s mind irrefutable evidence of his acquaintance
with the country. But as to narrated incidents he had seen puzzled
incredulity behind the Colonel’s eyes and had felt his semi-accusing
coldness of manner when their conversation came to an end.

He replenished a dying fire and sat down in an arm-chair, the despatch
case by his side, the book in his hands—the little shabby black book
that had been his Bible, his mascot, the fount of all his fortunes. His
fingers shook with fear as he turned over the familiar pages. The dead
man had come to life, and terrifyingly claimed his own. The room was
very still. The creak of a piece of furniture caused him to swing round
with a start, as though apprehensive of Krilov’s ghostly presence. He
must burn the book, the material evidence of his fraud. But the fire was
sulky. He must wait for the blaze, so that there should be no doubt of
the book’s destruction. Meanwhile his nerves were playing him insane
tricks. His ordeal had shaken him. He sought the steadying effect of
another whisky.

He leaned back in his chair. It had been an accursed evening. Once more
he had to lie to Olivia, and this time she appeared to be struggling
with uncertainty. There had been an unprecedented aloofness in her
attitude. Yes. He spoke the words aloud, “an unprecedented aloofness,”
at first with strange unsuccess and then with solemn deliberation; and
his voice sounded strange to his ears. If she suspected—but, no, she
could not suspect. His head grew heavy, his thoughts confused. The fire
was taking a devil of a time to burn up. Still, he was beginning to see
his way clearer. The whisky was a wonderful help to accurate thinking.
What an ass he had been not to recognize the fact before! Besides—the
roof of his mouth was parched with thirst.

The diabolical notebook had to be destroyed. But first there must be
flame in the grate. That little red glow would do the trick. It was only
a question of patience.

“Just a matter of patience, old man,” said he.

                 *        *        *        *        *

A couple of hours afterwards, Olivia, in nightdress and wrapper, entered
the room. The fire had gone out under its too heavy load of coal. Before
it sprawled Alexis, asleep. On the small table beside him stood the
whisky decanter, whose depleted contents caused Olivia to start with a
gasp of dismay. His drunken sleep became obvious. She made an
instinctive vain effort to arouse him. But the first pang of horror was
lost in agonized search for the reason of this amazing debauch. He, the
most temperate of men, by choice practically a drinker of water, to have
done this! Could the reason lie in the events of the evening which had
kept her staringly awake? She cowered under the new storm of doubt.

On the floor lay open a little dirty-paged book which must have fallen
from his hand. She picked it up, glanced through it, could make nothing
of it, for it was all in tiny Russian script. The horrible relation
between this derelict book and the almost emptied whisky decanter
occurred to her oversensitive brain. Then came suddenly the memory of a
stupid argument of months ago at The Point and his justification of the
plagiarist. Further, his putting of a hypothetical case—the finding on
the body of a dead man a notebook with leaves of the thinnest
paper. . . . She held in her hand such a notebook. It dropped from her
nerveless fingers. Suddenly she sprang with a low cry to her husband and
shook him by the shoulders.

“Alexis. Alexis. Wake up. For God’s sake.”

But the unaccustomed drug of the alcohol held him in stupor. She tried
again, wildly.

“Alexis, wake up and tell me what I think isn’t true.”

At last she realized that he would lie there until the effect of the
whisky had worn off. Mechanically, she put a cushion behind his head and
adjusted his limbs to a position of comfort. Mechanically, too, she put
the stopper in the decanter and replaced the siphon on the silver tray,
and with her scrap of a handkerchief tried to remove the ring which the
wet siphon had made on the table. Then she looked hopelessly round the
otherwise undisturbed and beloved room. What could be done until Alexis
should awaken?

She would go to bed. Perhaps she might sleep. She felt as though she had
been beaten from head to foot.

The despatch box lay open on the hearthrug, the key in the lock. Its
secrecy had hitherto been a jest with her. She had sworn it contained
locks of hair of Bluebeard victims. He had given out a legend of Secret
Service documents of vast importance. Now it was obvious that, at any
rate, it was the repository of the little black book.

She hesitated on the threshold. Her instinct of order forbade her to
leave the despatch box open and the book trailing about the floor. She
would lock the book up in it and put the key in one of Alexis’s pockets.
But when, having picked up the small leather box and carried it to the
desk, she prepared to do this, a name written on a common piece of paper
half in print—an official form—stared brutally at her. And there were
others underneath. And reading them she learned the complete official
history of John Briggs, Able Seaman, from the time of his joining the
Armoured Column in Russia to his discharge, after his mine-sweeper had
been torpedoed in the North Sea.

Olivia, her dark hair falling about the shoulders of her heliotrope
wrap, sat in her husband’s writing-chair, staring at him with tragic
eyes as he slept, his brown hair carelessly sweeping his pale brow, and
kept a ghastly vigil.


                              CHAPTER XVI

BLAISE OLIFANT sat over his work in the room which once, for want of a
better name, the late Mr. Gale called his study; but it was a room
transformed to studious use. The stuffed trout and the large scale-map
of the neighbourhood and the country auctioneer’s carelessly bestowed
oddments had been replaced by cases of geological specimens and
bookshelves filled with a specialist’s library. The knee-hole
writing-desk, with its cigarette-burned edge, had joined the rest of the
old lares and penates in honourable storage, and a long refectory-table,
drawn across the window overlooking the garden, and piled with papers,
microscopes, and other apparatus, reigned in its stead. Olifant loved
the room’s pleasant austerity. It symbolized himself, his aims and his
life’s limitations. A fire burned in the grate, for it was a cold, raw
morning, and, outside, miserable rain defaced the April day.

He smoked a pipe as he corrected proofs, so absorbed in the minute and
half-mechanical task that he did not hear the door open and the quiet
entrance of a maid.

“Mr. Triona, sir.”

The words cut through the silence so that he started and swung round in
his chair.

“Mr. Triona? Where?”

“In the dining-room.”

“Show him in here.”

The maid retired. Olifant rose and stood before the fire with a puzzled
expression on his face. Triona in Medlow at ten o’clock in the morning?
Something serious must have brought a man, unannounced, from London to
Shropshire. His thoughts flew to Olivia.

A moment afterwards the dishevelled spectre of Triona burst into the
room and closed the door behind him. His coat was wet with rain, his
boots and trouser hems muddy. His eyes stared out of a drawn, unshaven
face.

“Thank God I’ve found you. During the journey I had a sickening dread
lest you might be away.”

“But how did you manage to get here at this hour?” asked Olifant, for
Medlow is far from London and trains are few. “You must have arrived
last night. Why the deuce didn’t you come to me?”

“I got to Worcester by the last train and put up for the night and came
on first thing this morning,” replied Triona impatiently.

“And you’ve walked from the station. You’re wet through. Let me get you
a jacket.”

Olifant moved to the bell, but Triona arrested him.

“No—no. I’m taking the next train back to London. Don’t talk of jackets
and foolery. I’ve left Olivia.”

Olifant made a stride, almost menacing, towards him, the instinctive
gesture of his one arm curiously contrasting with the stillness of the
pinned sleeve of the other.

“What?”

“What I say,” cried Triona. “I’ve left Olivia. I’ve left her for ever.
I’m cutting myself out of her life.”

“You’re mad. Olivia——”

Triona put up a checking hand. “Oh, no, not Olivia.” He laughed bitterly
at the indignant advocacy in Olifant’s tone. “Olivia’s there—where she
always has been—among the stars. It’s I that have fallen. Good God!
like Lucifer. It’s I that crawl.” He caught an accusing question in the
other’s hardening eyes. “It isn’t what you might naturally think.
There’s not the ghost of another woman. There never has been—never
shall be. It’s my only clean record. And I love her—my God! My soul’s
in Hell, aching and burning and shrieking for her. I shall live in Hell
for the rest of my life.”

Olifant turned, and wheeling round his writing-chair sat down and
pointed to an arm-chair by the fire.

“Sit down and tell me quietly what is the matter.”

But Triona waved aside the invitation and remained standing. “The matter
is that I’m an impostor and a liar, and Olivia has found it out. Listen.
Don’t ask questions until I’ve done. I’m here for Olivia’s sake. You’re
the only creature in the world that can understand—the only one that
can help her through. And she couldn’t tell you. Her pride wouldn’t let
her. And if it did, the ordeal for her! You’ll be able to go to her now
and say, ‘I know everything.’”

“Up to now, my dear fellow,” said Olifant, “you’ve been talking in
riddles. But before you begin, let me remind you that there are two
sides to every story. What I mean is—get it into your head that I
realize I’m listening to your side.”

“But there aren’t two sides,” cried Triona. “You don’t suppose I’ve come
down here to defend myself! If you see when I’ve done that I’ve had some
excuse, that there is a grain of saving grace lying somewhere
hidden—all well and good. But I’m not here to plead a case. Haven’t I
cleared the ground by telling you I’m a liar and an impostor?”

Olifant again looked searchingly at the pale and haggard-eyed young man,
his brown hair unkempt and falling across his broad forehead, his lips
twitching nervously; and the elder man’s glance turned to one of pitying
kindness. He rose, laid his hand on the lapel of the wet coat.

“You’ll take this off, at any rate. There—we’ll hang it over the
fender-seat to dry. Sit beside it and dry your legs. It’s no good
catching your death of cold.”

Triona submitted to the friendly authority and sat down in his shirt
sleeves before the blaze. Olifant, aware of the sedative value of
anticlimax, smiled and offered refreshments. Tea—coffee—a drop of
something to keep out the cold. Triona suddenly glanced at him.

“I’ll never touch alcohol again as long as I live.”

A cigarette, then? Olifant handed the box, held a match. Triona smoked.
Olifant re-lit his pipe and leaned back in his chair.

“Now let me have the plain, unvarnished tale.”

They smoked many cigarettes and many pipes during the telling of the
amazing story. As his life had unfolded itself in the grimness of the
little Newcastle kitchen, so he recounted it to Olifant. In his
passionate final grip on Truth, which for the last few months of his
awakening had proved so elusive, he tried to lay bare the vain secret of
every folly and the root of every lie. The tangled web of the hackneyed
aphorism he unwove, tracking every main filament to its centre, every
cross-thread from the beginning to end of its vicious circle.

Plain unvarnished tale it was not in the man’s nature to give. Even in
his agony of avowal he must be dramatic, must seize on the picturesque.
Now he sat on the narrow leather-covered fender-seat, hunched up, his
eyes ablaze, narrating the common actualities of his life; and now he
strode about the room, with great gestures of his pink-shirted arms,
picturing vividly the conflicting emotions of his soul. First he
sketched—so it seemed to the temperamentally remote Olifant—in broad
outlines of flame, his true career. Then in strokes, like red-hot wire,
he filled in the startling details. The grizzled head and sharp-cut
features of the naked body of the dead man Krilov in the ditch—the cold
grey waste around—the finding of the odds and ends, the glint of the
pocket-compass behind a few spikes of grass, the false teeth, the little
black book, the thing of sortilege, of necromantic influence . . . the
spell of the book in the night watches in the North Sea, its obsession;
his pixy-led infatuation which made him cast aside the slough of John
Briggs and sun himself in the summer of the world as the dragonfly,
Alexis Triona. In swift lines, too, of a Will-o’-the-Wisp’s dance he
revealed the course of his love. Then, unconsciously, before the
concentrated gaze of the other man he dropped a baffling gauze curtain,
as on a stage, through which his motives and his actions appeared
uncertain and unreal.

Olifant had listened in astounded silence. His first instinct was one of
indignation. He had been unforgivably deceived by this exterior of
friendship under false pretences. The blow dealt to unregenerate man’s
innate vanity hurt like a stab. His own clear soul rose in revolt. The
fellow’s mendacity, bewildering in its amplitude, would have set Hell
agape. He shivered at the cold craft of his imposture; besides, he was a
ghoul, a stripper of the dead. He lost the man he had loved in a new and
incomprehensible monster. But as Triona went on he gradually fell under
the spell of his passionate remorse, and found himself setting the human
against the monstrous and wondering which way the balance would turn.
And then he became suddenly aware of the impostor’s real and splendid
achievements, and he stood in pitiful amaze at the futility of the
unnecessary fraud.

“But why, in God’s name? Why?” he cried, staring through the baffling
curtain. “A man of genius, you would have held your own without all
this.”

“I could have done nothing without the help of that damned little black
book. Don’t you see how the necromancy of the thing gripped me—how it
has got its diabolical revenge? I told you not to ask me questions,”
Triona burst out fiercely. “You’re trying to make me defend myself.” He
swung away, then laughed mirthlessly. “There seems to be a poetic
justice in life. This room in which we have spent so many hours—it’s
filled from floor to ceiling with my lies. Now I come with Truth, a sort
of disinfectant. Perhaps I was driven back just to do it.”

Olifant knitted a perplexed brow. Such fantastic psychologies were
beyond his simple scientific habit of mind. He said:

“You told me you came here on account of Olivia.”

“Of course.”

“Well—I must ask you again the same everlasting ‘Why?’ How could you
dare to marry her with this lie on your soul?”

“Yes. How dared I?” said Triona dejectedly.

“But wouldn’t it have been quite simple to tell her the truth? You could
have afforded to make a clean breast of it. You had proved yourself a
remarkable man, apart from—from the Triona myth. And she is big enough
to have stood it. Why, in God’s name, didn’t you trust her?”

Triona threw out his hands helplessly. He did not know. Again he pleaded
the unseen power that had driven him. When he had tried to resist, it
was too late.

“And now you think me a fool and a knave.”

“I think you’re a fool,” said Olifant.

“But not a scoundrel? I should like to know. You were the first man who
really held out the hand of friendship to me. Till then people regarded
me as an interesting specimen. You took me on my human side. I shall
never forget coming to your sister’s house at Oxford. It was a new and
wonderful atmosphere.”

“If that is so,” said Olifant, “why didn’t it compel
confidence—something of the real truth? I see you now telling my sister
and myself your fairy tale; in the same fervid way as you’ve been
telling me the truth this morning.”

Triona rose and put on his jacket which now was dry.

“How can I hope to make you understand, when I don’t understand myself?
Besides,” he flashed, after shrugging himself impatiently into the
garment, “haven’t I said I wasn’t seeking condonation or sympathy?”

“You asked me whether I thought you a scoundrel,” said Olifant quietly.

“Well, do you? Say I am, and have done with it.”

“If I did, I don’t see what good it would do,” replied Olifant, a vague
comprehension of this imaginative alien soul dawning on his mind.
“You’re out for penance in the same crazy way you’ve been out for
everything else. So you hand me the scourge and tell me to lay on. But I
won’t. Also—if I committed myself by calling you an unmitigated
blackguard, I couldn’t give you the advice that it’s in my heart to give
you.”

“And what’s that?”

“To go back to Olivia and do your penance with her by telling and living
the truth. _Magna est veritas et prævalebit._ Especially with a woman
who loves you.”

Triona turned to the table by the window and stared out into the
rain-swept garden, and the vision of a girl horror-stricken, frozen,
dead, rose before his eyes. Presently he said, his back to the room:

“You mean kindly and generously. But it’s impossible to go back. The
man, Alexis Triona, whom she loved, has melted away. He never had real
existence. In his place she sees a stranger, one John Briggs, whom she
loathes like Hell—I’ve seen it in her eyes. She feels as if she had
been contaminated by contact with some unclean beast.”

Olifant sprang from his chair and, catching him by the shoulder, swung
him round.

“You infernal fool, she doesn’t!”

“I know better,” said Triona.

“I’m beginning to think I know _her_ better,” Olifant retorted.

“Well—that is possible,” said Triona. “You’re of her caste. I’m not.
I’ve pretended to be, and that’s how I’ve come to grief. You’re a good
fellow, Olifant, straight, just like her; and neither of you can
understand the man who runs crooked.”

“Crooked be damned!” exclaimed Olifant.

But all his condemnation of self-accusing epithets could not dissuade
the fate-driven young man from his purpose. Triona repeated the original
intention of his visit: to put Olifant in complete possession of facts
which Olivia’s pride might not allow her to reveal, and to charge him,
thus equipped, with Olivia’s immediate welfare. At last he burst out
again:

“Man alive! Don’t torture me. All the devils in Hell are doing it, and
they’re enough for any man. Have some imagination! Think what it would
mean to her to have me crawling about in her path for ever and ever.
When love is dead it’s dead. There’s no resurrection. She loved Alexis
Triona. Won’t you ever understand? He’s dead. The love’s dead. If I
stayed with her, I should be a kind of living corpse to which she’s
tied. So I’m going away—out of her life altogether.”

“And where are you going?”

“Just out into the spaciousness of the wide world,” replied Triona with
a gesture. He looked suddenly at his wrist watch. “Good Lord!” he cried.
“I’ve only just time to catch my train. Good-bye.”

“Wait a minute,” said Olifant. “Do you think it fair on a woman? While
you disappear for ever into spaciousness she’ll remain none the less
married—tied to you for the rest of her life.”

“Oh, don’t let her worry about that!” cried Triona. “I’ll soon be dead.”

He sped to the door. Olifant clutched at him and for a while held fast.

“Never mind trains. You’ll stay here to-day. I can’t let you go—in this
hysterical state.”

But Triona wrenched himself free. A one-armed man is at a physical
disadvantage in a struggle with a wiry two-armed opponent. Olifant was
pushed staggering back, and, before he could recover himself, Triona had
flashed from the room, and a moment later the clang of the front door
told him he had left the house.

Olifant, after a moment’s reflection, went to the telephone and gave a
London number. Then he drew his chair nearer the fire and re-lit his
pipe and waited for the call to come through. Work was impossible. He
was in no mood to enter into the gaiety of printers in their dance
through the dead languages with which his biological pages were strewn.
His heart was exceeding heavy. He stared into the fire and thought of
what might have been, had he not been a fool. At any rate, she would
have been spared misery such as this. He had loved her from the moment
she had opened that untouched room upstairs, and the delicate spirit of
one that was dead had touched them with invisible hands. And he had been
a fool. Just a dry stick of a tongue-tied, heart-hobbled, British fool.
It had only been when another, romantic and unreticent, had carried her
off that he realized the grotesqueness of his unutterable pain. Well,
she was married, and married to the man to whom he had given his rare
affection; and, folly of follies, all his intimacy with her had grown
since her marriage. She was inexpressibly dear to him. Her hurt was his
hurt. Her happiness all that mattered. And she loved her madman of a
husband. Deep down in her heart she loved him still, in spite of shock
and disillusion. Of that he was certain. He himself forgave him for his
wild, boyish lovableness. Olivia abandoned—it was unthinkable!

After an eternity the telephone bell rang. He leaped up. Eventually came
the faint, clear notes of a voice which was Olivia’s. They established
identities.

“Alexis has been here. Has told me everything. He has left here by the
midday train. Of course, I don’t know whether you want to see him; but
if you do his train gets into Paddington at six-fifteen.”

And the voice came again:

“Thanks. I’ll meet him there.”

And there was silence.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Olivia and Myra met the train at Paddington. But they sought in vain for
Alexis Triona. He had not arrived in London.


                              CHAPTER XVII

THE unhappy young man rushed through the train to the railway station,
goaded by the new passion of remorse and frantic with the despair which
had driven him from the accusing horror in Olivia’s eyes. It was only
when he waited on the platform at Worcester, where he must change to the
main line, that he became suddenly aware of loss of sanity. His
suit-case, containing all the belongings which he had taken from the
flat, was lying a mile or so away at the inn where he had spent the
night. He had not slept, not even gone to bed, not even opened the
suit-case. He had dashed out before the inn was awake to catch the
earliest morning train to Medlow. And from that moment to this, just as
the London train was steaming in, both luggage and unpaid bill had
vanished from his mind. There was nothing to do but go to the inn and
proceed to London by a later train. Thus, Fate had stage-managed for him
another deception of Olivia.

The realization of his crazy lapse of memory was a sobering shock. Never
before had he lost grip of himself. Hitherto, the tighter the
corner—and he had found himself in many—the clearer had been his
brain. The consciousness of the working of a cool intellect had given a
pleasurable thrill to danger. Now, for over twenty-four hours, he had
been acting like a madman, in contemplation of which the only thrill he
experienced was one of profound disgust. To enter whatever sphere of
life the effacement of Alexis Triona should render necessary, raving
like a maniac would be absurd. It would need all his wit.

His retrieved suit-case in the rack of the third-class carriage, the
paid hotel bill in his pocket, and food, up to then forgotten, in his
stomach, he fortified himself in this decision, until exhausted nature
claimed profound and untroubled sleep.

He awoke at Paddington, homeless for the night. Now his brain worked
normally. Alexis Triona had disappeared from the face of the earth. It
was therefore essential to avoid hotels where Alexis Triona might
possibly be recognized. Besides, he knew that West End hotels were
congested, that the late-comers to London had been glad to find a couch
at a Turkish Bath. His chauffeur’s knowledge of London came to his aid.
He drove to a mouldy hotel in the purlieus of the Euston Road, and there
found a frowzy room. The contrast between the bed, its dingy counterpane
sagging into the worn hollow of the mattress beneath, the threadbare
rugs askew on the oilcloth, the blistered deal washstand and
dressing-table, the damp, dirty paper, the bleak blinds, and the sweet
and dainty appointments of the home he had left smote him till he could
have groaned aloud. Not that he gave a thought to such things in
themselves. Physical comfort meant little to him. But the lost
daintiness signified Olivia; this abominable room, the negation of her.

He sat on the bed, rolled a cigarette, and began to think clearly. That
he had for ever forfeited Olivia’s affection it never entered his head
to doubt. He saw her face grow more cold and tragic, and her eyes more
horror-stricken at every fresh revelation of mendacity. Loathing
himself, he had not pleaded for forgiveness; he had done penance,
applied the lash, blackening himself unmercifully. He had lost sense of
actual things in his cold romance of deception. He stood before her
self-proclaimed, a monster of lies. Now he saw himself an unholy
stranger profaning the sanctity of her life. He had fought for Heaven
with Hell’s weapons, and Eternal Justice had hurled him back into the
abyss. In the abyss he must remain, leaving her to tread the stars.

The exposure of the Vronsky myth had hurt her as much as anything.

“Vronsky?” She put her hands, fingers apart, to her temples. “But you
made me give my heart to Vronsky!”

Yes, surely he had committed towards her the unforgivable sin. He was
damned—at any rate, in this world. To rid her irremediably of his
pestilent existence was the only hope of salvation. Olifant was a fool,
speaking according to the folly of an honourable gentleman. He clenched
his teeth and gripped his hands. If only he could have been such a fool!
To appear the kind of man that Olifant easily, naturally, was had been
his gnawing ambition from his first insight into gentle life, long ago,
in the Prince’s household. But, all the same, Olifant was a fool—a sort
of Galahad out for Grails, and remote from the baseness in which he had
wallowed.

“Go to Olivia. She loves you.”

Chivalrous imbecile! He had not seen Olivia’s great staring dark eyes
with rims around them, and the awful little drawn face.

He was right—it was the only way out.

Yet, during all this interview with Olivia, he had been quite sane. He
had indulged in no histrionics. He had not declaimed, and flung his arms
about, as he had done in Olifant’s study. He had felt himself talking
like a dead man immersed up to the neck in the flames of Hell, but
possessed of a cold clear intellect. In a way, he was proud of this. To
have made an emotional appeal would have obscured the issue towards
which his new-found honesty was striving.

His last words to Olivia were:

“And the future?”

She said hopelessly: “Is there a future?”

Then she drew a deep breath and passed her fingers across her face.

“Don’t talk to me any more, for heaven’s sake. I must be alone. I must
have air. I must walk.”

She shrank wide of him as he opened the door for her, and she passed
out, her eyes remote.

It was then that the poet-charlatan became suddenly aware of his
sentence. If the Avengers, or what not uncheerful personages of Greek
Tragedy had surrounded him with their ghastly shapes and had chanted
their dismal Choric Ode of Doom, his inmost soul could not have been
more convinced of that which he must forthwith do. He never thought of
questioning the message. He faced the absolute.

Waiting until he heard the click of the outer door of the flat
announcing Olivia’s departure in quest of unpolluted air, he went into
his dressing-room and packed a suit-case with necessaries, including the
despatch-case which contained his John Briggs papers and the accursed
little black book.

He met Myra in the hall, impassive.

“If you had told me you were going on a journey, I would have packed for
you. Does Mrs. Triona know?”

“No,” said he. “She doesn’t. Wait.”

He left her, and returned a few moments afterwards with a note he had
scribbled. After all, Olivia must suffer no uncertainty. She must not
dread his possible return.

“Give that to Mrs. Triona.”

“Are you coming back?”

He looked at her as at a Fate in a black gown relieved by two solitary
patches of white at the wrists.

“Why do you ask me that?”

“You look as if you weren’t,” said Myra. “I know there has been trouble
to-day.”

He had always stood in some awe of this efficient automaton of a woman,
who had never given him a shadow of offence, but in whom he had divined
a jealousy which he had always striven to propitiate. But now she
awakened a forlorn sense of dignity.

He picked up his suit-case.

“What has that got to do with you, Myra?”

“If Mrs. Triona’s room was on fire and I rushed in through the flames to
save her, would you ask me what business it was of mine?”

The artist in him wondered for a moment at her even, undramatic
presentation of the hypothesis. He could not argue the point, however,
knowing her life’s devotion to Olivia. So yielding to the unlit, pale
blue eyes in the woman’s unemotional face, he said:

“Yes. There is trouble. Deadly trouble. It’s all my doing. You quite
understand that?”

“It couldn’t be anything else, sir,” said Myra.

“And so I’m going away and never coming back.”

He moved to the door. She made the swift pace or two of the trained
servant to open it for him. She stood for a few seconds quite rigid, her
hand on the door-knob. Their eyes met. He saw in hers a cold hostility.
Without a word he passed her, and heard the door slam behind him.

It was when he reached the pavement, derelict on the wastes of the
world, that his nerves gave way. Until the click of his brain at
Worcester station, he had been demented.

“Never again,” said he.

                 *        *        *        *        *

He undressed and went to bed. It was some hours before he could sleep.
But sleep came at last, and he woke in the morning refreshed physically,
and feeling capable of facing the unknown future. As yet he had no
definite plan. All he knew was that he must disappear. Merely leaving
Olivia and setting up for himself elsewhere as Alexis Triona was not to
be thought of. Alexis Triona and all that his name stood for—good and
evil—must be blotted out of human ken. He must seek fortune again in a
foreign country. Why not America? Writing under a fresh pseudonym, he
could maintain himself with his pen. Bare livelihood was all that
mattered. Even in this earthly Lake of Fire and Brimstone to which, as a
liar, he had apocalyptically condemned himself, a man must live. During
moments of his madness he had dallied with wild thoughts of suicide. His
fundamental sanity had rejected them. He was no coward. Whatever
punishment was in store for him, good God! he was man enough to face it.

In his swift packing he had seized a clump of his headed note-paper. A
sheet of this he took when, after breakfast, he had remounted to his
frowzy room, and wrote a letter to his publishers informing them that he
was suddenly summoned abroad, and instructing them to pay, till further
notice, all sums accruing to him into Olivia’s banking account.
Consulting his pass-book, he drew a cheque in Olivia’s favour, which he
enclosed with a covering letter to Olivia’s bankers. Then, driving to
his own bank, he cashed a cheque for the balance of some hundreds of
pounds. With this, he prepared to start life in some new world.
Restless, he drove back to his hotel. Restless still, he obeyed the
instinct of his life, and began to wander; not about any such haunts as
might be frequented by his acquaintances, but through the dingy purlieus
of the vague region north of the line of Euston and King’s Cross
Stations.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was in a mean street in Somers Town, a hopeless, littered street of
little despairing shops, and costers’ barrows, and tousled women and
unclean children, that they met. They came up against each other face to
face, and recoiled a step or two, each scanning the other in a
puzzlement of recognition. Then Triona cried:

“Yes, of course—you’re Boronowski.”

“And you—the name escapes me—” the other tapped his forehead with a
fat, pallid hand “—you’re the chauffeur-mechanic of Prince——”

“Briggs,” said Triona.

“Briggs—yes. The only man who knew more than I of Ukranian
literature—I a Pole and you an Englishman. Ah, my friend, what has
happened since those days?”

“A hell of a lot,” said Triona.

“You may indeed say so,” replied Boronowski. He smiled. “Well?”

“Well?” said Triona.

“What are you, well-dressed and looking prosperous, doing in this—” he
waved a hand “—in this sordidity?”

Triona responded with a smile—but at the foreign coinage of a word.

“I’m just wandering about. And you?”

“I’m living here for the moment. Living is costly and funds are scarce.
I go back to Warsaw to-morrow—next week—a fortnight——”

“Poland’s a bit upset these days,” said Triona.

“That is why I am here—and that is why I am going back, my friend,”
said the Pole.

He was a stout man, nearing forty, with dark eyes and a straggly red
moustache and beard already grizzled. His grey suit was stained with
wear; on his jacket a spike of thread showing where a button was
missing. He wore an old black felt hat stuck far back on his head,
revealing signs of baldness above an intellectual forehead.

Triona laughed. “Was there ever a Pole who was not a conspirator?”

“Say rather, was there ever a Pole who did not love his country more
than his life?”

“Yes. I must say, you Poles are patriotic,” said Triona.

Boronowski’s dark eyes flashed, and seizing his companion’s arm, he
hurried him along the encumbered pavement.

“Why do you Englishmen who have lately died and bled in millions for
your country, always have a little laugh, a little sneer, at patriotism?
To listen to you, one would think you cared nothing for your country’s
welfare.”

“We’ve been so sure of it, you see.”

“But we Poles have not. For two centuries we have not had a country. For
two centuries we have dreamed of it, and now we have got it at last, and
our blood sings in our veins, and we have no other interest on earth.
And just as we are beginning to realize the wonder of it, we find
ourselves enmeshed in German intrigue, with our promised way to the sea
blocked, with the Powers saying: ‘No Ukraine, no Galicia,’ and with the
Russian Red Army attacking us. Ah, no. We are not so assured of our
country’s welfare that we can afford to depreciate patriotism.”

“What are you doing here in England?” asked Triona.

“Breaking my heart,” cried Boronowski passionately. “I come for help,
and find only fair words. I ask for money for guns and munitions for the
enforcement of the Treaty of Versailles, and they reply, ‘Oh, we can’t
do that. Our Labour Party wouldn’t allow us to do that. But we’ll tell
those naughty Bolshevists to leave you alone.’ So I return, my mission a
failure. Oh, I play a very humble part. I do not wish to magnify myself.
Those with me have failed. We are cast on our own resources. We are
fighting for our new national life. And as the blood in our hearts and
the thought in our brains cry ‘Poland, Poland,’ so shall the words be
ever loud in our mouths. And look. If we did not cry out, who would
listen to us? And we are crying our ‘Poland, Poland,’ in all the Entente
and neutral countries—I, Boronowski, the most unimportant of all.
Perhaps we are voices crying in the wilderness. But one Voice, once on a
time, was heard—and revolutionized the world.”

The man’s voice, crying in the wilderness of the sordid Somers Town
street, awoke at any rate a responsive chord in the sensitive creature
by his side.

“Of course, I understand,” said he. “Forgive my idle speech. But I am in
great personal trouble, and I spoke with the edge of my lips.”

Boronowski flashed a glance at him.

“Do you know the remedy? The remedy for silly unhappinesses that affect
you here and here—” he swung a hand, touching forehead and heart “—the
little things——”

“I’m damned if they’re little,” said Triona.

“Yes, my friend,” exclaimed the Pole, halting suddenly in front of a
wilting greengrocer’s shop, and holding him by the lapel of his coat.
“Procure for yourself a sense of proportion. In the myriad of animated
beings, what is the individual but an insignificant atom? What are your
sufferings in the balance of the world’s sufferings? Yes. Yes. Of course
you feel them—the toothache, the heartache, the agony of soul. But I
claim that the individual has a remedy.”

“What is that?” asked Triona.

“He must cast off the individual, merge his pain in the common sorrow of
humanity. He must strip himself free of self, and identify himself with
a great cause.”

A rusty virago, carrying a straw marketing bag, pushed him rudely aside,
for he was blocking the entrance to the shop.

“We can’t talk here,” he said, recovering his balance. “Do you want to
talk?” he asked abruptly.

“Very much,” replied Triona, suddenly aware that this commonplace
looking prophet, vibrating with inspiration, might possibly have some
message for him, spiritually derelict.

“Then come up to my rooms.”

To Triona’s surprise, he plunged into the crowded greengrocer’s shop,
turned into an evil-smelling, basket-littered passage at the back,
mounted a couple of flights of unclean stairs, and unlocked and threw
open the door of an untidy sitting-room looking out on to the noisy
street. He swung a wooden chair from a little deal table strewn with
paper, and pointed to a musty sofa.

“That,” said he courteously, “is the more comfortable. Pray be seated.”

He picked a depopulated packet of cigarettes from the table.

“Will you smoke? For refreshment, I can offer you tea—” he pointed to a
spirit-lamp and poor tea equipage in a corner. He did the honours of his
mildewed establishment with much grace. Triona accepted the cigarette,
but declined the tea. Boronowski seated himself on the wooden chair.
Having taken off his hat, he revealed himself entirely bald, save for a
longish grizzling red fringe at the back, from ear-tip to ear-tip. The
quick rites of hospitality performed, he plunged again into impatient
speech, recapitulating what he had said before and ending in the same
peroration.

“Salvation lies in a man’s effacement of himself, and his identification
with a great cause.”

“But, my dear man,” cried Triona feverishly, “what great cause is there
in the world for an Englishman of the present day to devote himself to?
Look at the damned country. You’re living in it. Is there a cry
anywhere, ‘_England über alles?_’ Have you seen any enthusiasm for any
kind of idea? Of course I love my country. I’ve fought for her on land
and sea. I’ve been wounded. I’ve been torpedoed. And I’d go through it
all over again if my country called. But my country doesn’t call.”

He rose from the sofa and walked up and down the little room, throwing
about his arms, less like an Englishman than his Polish host, who,
keeping his eyes on him, nodded his head in amazed approbation as he
developed his thesis—that of the fervid creature eager to fight
England’s battles, but confronted with England’s negation of any battles
to fight.

“The only positive ideal in England at the present moment is Bolshevism.
The only flag waved in this war-wearied country is the red flag. All the
rest is negative. Not what we can do—but what we can prevent. And you,
Boronowski, a professor of history, know very well that no Gospel of
Negation has ever succeeded since the world began. Look at me,” he said,
standing before the Pole, with wide, outstretched arms, “young, fit,
with a brain that has proved itself—I won’t tell you how—and eager to
throw my personal sufferings into the world’s melting-pot—to live, my
dear fellow, to work, to devote myself to some ideal. I must do that, or
die. It’s all very well for you to theorize. You do it beautifully.
There’s not a word wrong in anything you say. But what is the Great
Cause that I can devote myself to?”

“Poland,” said Boronowski.


                             CHAPTER XVIII

THE word was like the lash of a whip. He stared at the patriot
open-mouthed.

“Yes, Poland,” said Boronowski. “Why not? You want to fight for a Great
Cause. Is not a free and independent Poland the keystone of the arch of
reconstructed Europe? It is a commonplace axiom. Poland overthrown,
overrun with Bolshevism, all Europe crumbles into dust. The world is
convulsed. Fighting for Poland is fighting for the salvation of the
world. Could there be a greater cause?”

His dark eyes glowed with compelling inspiration. His outflung arm ended
in a pointing finger. And Triona saw it as the finger of Salvation Yeo
in his boyhood’s picture.

“Wonderful, wonderful,” he said, below his breath.

“And simple. Come with me to Warsaw. I have friends of some influence.
Otherwise I should not be here. The Polish Army would welcome you with
open arms.”

Triona thrust out a sudden hand, which the other gripped.

“By God!” he cried, “I’ll come.”

An hour afterwards, his brain dominated by the new idea, he danced his
way through the melancholy streets. Here, indeed, was salvation. Here he
could live the life of Truth. Here was the glorious chance—although he
would never see her on earth again—of justifying himself in Olivia’s
eyes. And in itself it was a marvellous adventure. There would be
endless days when he should live for the hour that he was alive, without
thought of an unconjecturable to-morrow. Into the cause of Poland he
would fling his soul. Yes, Boronowski was right. The sovereign remedy.
His individual life—what did it matter to him? All the beloved things
were past and gone. They lay already on the further side of the Valley
of the Shadow of Death. His personality was merged into a
self-annihilating creature that would henceforth be the embodiment of a
spiritual idea.

Thus for the rest of the day, and during the night, his mind worked.
Arrived in Poland, he would press for the fiercest section of the front.
The bullet that killed him would be welcome. He would die gloriously.
Olivia should know.

As John Briggs, with his papers in order, he found his passport a simple
matter. Boronowski, with whom he spent most of his time, obtained a
speedy visa at the Polish and other Consulates. During the period of
waiting he went carefully through the contents of the suit-case and
removed all traces of the name and initials of Alexis Triona. The little
black book he burned page by page with matches in the empty grate of his
room. When it was consumed, he felt himself rid of an evil thing. In
strange East London emporiums, unknown to dwellers in the West End, and
discovered by restless wandering, he purchased an elementary kit for the
campaign. Much of his time he spent in Boronowski’s quarters in Somers
Town, reading propaganda pamphlets and other literature dealing with
Polish actualities. When the Polish Army welcomed him with open arms,
they must find him thoroughly equipped. He bought a Polish grammar, and
compiled with Boronowski a phrase-book so as to be prepared with an
elementary knowledge of the language. The Pole marvelled at his fervour.

“You spring at things like an intellectual tiger,” said he, “and then
fasten on to them with the teeth of a bulldog.”

“I’m a quick worker when I concentrate,” said Triona.

And for many days he concentrated, sleeping and eating little, till his
cheeks grew gaunt and his eyes bright and haggard. In his interminable
talks with Boronowski, he concentrated all his faculties, until the
patriot would laugh and accuse him of a tigerish spring on the secrets
of his soul.

“It’s true,” cried Triona, “it’s the soul of Poland I want to make enter
my being. To serve you to any purpose I must see through Polish eyes and
feel with a Polish heart, and feel my veins thrill with the spirituality
of Poland.”

“Is that possible?”

“You shall see,” answered Triona.

And just as he had fallen under the obsession of the dead Krilov during
the night watches in the North Sea, so did he fall under the obsession
of this new Great Cause. Something fundamentally histrionic in his
temperament flung him into these excesses of impersonation. Already he
began to regret his resumption of the plain name of John Briggs. Even in
the pre-war Russian days he had seldom been addressed by it. For the
first social enquiry in Russia elicited the Christian name of a man’s
father. And his father’s name being Peter, he was called by all and
sundry Ivan Petrovitch. So that even then, in his fervent zeal to merge
himself into the Russian spirit, he had grown to regard the two
downright words of his name as meaningless monosyllables. But he
strangled the regret fiercely as soon as it arose.

“No, by heaven!” said he, “No more lies.”

And yet, in spite of unalterable resolve, as he lay sleepless with
overwrought nerves in the sour room in the Euston Road, he was haunted
by lunatic Polish forms, Brigiovski, Brigowski, which he might adopt
without breaking his vow; he could not see himself in the part of a
Polish patriot labelled as John Briggs; just as well might a great actor
seek to identify himself with Hamlet while wearing cricketing flannels
and a bowler hat.

Only once in his talks with Boronowski did he refer to the unhappiness
to which he was to apply the sovereign remedy. The days were passing
without sign of immediate departure. Boronowski, under the orders of his
superiors, must await instructions. Triona chafed at the delay.

Boronowski smiled indulgently.

“The first element in devotion to a cause, or a woman, is patience.
Illimitable patience. The demands of a cause are very much like those of
a woman, apparently illogical and capricious, but really inexorable and
unswerving in their purpose.”

“It’s all very well to talk of patience,” Triona fumed, “but when one is
hag-ridden as I am——”

Boronowski smiled again. “_Histoire de femme——_”

Triona flushed scarlet and sprang to his feet.

“How dare you twist my words like that?”

Boronowski looked at him for a puzzled moment, seeking the association
of ideas. Then, grasping it:

“Forgive me, my friend,” he said courteously. “My English, after all, is
that of a foreigner. The word connection was far from my mind. I took
your speech to mean that you were driven by unhappiness. And the
unhappiness of a young man is so often—— Again, I beg your pardon.”

Triona passed his hand through his brown hair.

“All right,” he said, “I’m sorry. Yes. If you want to know, it’s a
woman. She’s the day-spring from on high, and I’m damned beyond
redemption. The best thing that could happen would be if she knew I were
dead.”

Boronowski tugged at his little greyish-red beard. A follower of great
causes was never the worse for having the Furies at his heels. But he
was a man of kindly nature.

“No one while he is alive can be damned beyond redemption,” he said. “I
don’t wish to press my indiscretion further. Yet, as an older man, could
I be of service to you in any way?”

“No, you’re very kind, but no one can help me.” Then an idea flashed
across his excited brain. “Not until I’m dead. Then, perhaps, you might
do something for me.”

“You’re not going to die yet, my friend.”

“How do we know? I’m going to fight. The first day I may get knocked
out. Should anything happen to me, would you kindly communicate with
some one?”

He moved to the paper-littered table and began to scribble.

“It’s all rather premature, my friend,” said Boronowski. “But as you
wish.” He took the scrap of paper which bore the name and address of
Major Olifant. “This I may be liable to lose. I will enter it in my
notebook.” He made the entry. Then, “May I say a serious word to you?”

“Anything you like.”

“There is such a thing as the fire of purification. But—” he put a hand
on the younger man’s shoulder, “you can’t call it down from Heaven. You
must await its coming. So we get back to my original remark. Patience,
more patience, and always patience.”

This was consoling for the moment; but after a few days’ further
grappling with the Polish language, he burst into Boronowski’s lodgings
and found the patriot at his table, immersed in work.

“If we don’t start soon,” he cried, “I’ll go mad. I haven’t slept for
nights and nights. I’ll only sleep when we are on our journey, and I
know that all this is reality and not a dream.”

“I’ve just had orders,” replied Boronowski. “We start to-morrow morning.
Here are our tickets.”

That night, Triona wrote to Olivia. It was an eternal farewell. On the
morrow he was leaving England to offer up his unworthy life as a
sacrifice to the Great Cause of Poland. The only reparation he could
make for the wrong he had done her was to beseech her to look on him as
one already dead. It covered many pages.

When he returned to his musty room after this last hour’s heart-breaking
communion with her, he sat on his bed overwhelmed by sudden despair.
What guarantee had she of this departure for Poland greater than that of
his mission to Helsingfors last summer? Would she not throw the letter
aside in disgust—another romantic lie? He wished he had not written. He
took faint hope again on the reflection that by posting another letter
from Warsaw he could establish his veracity. But why should he keep on
worrying her with the details of his miserable existence? Better, far
better that she should look on him as dead; better, far better that she
should believe him dead, so that she could reconstruct her young and
broken life. He might die in battle; but then he might not. He had
already carried his life safely through battles by land and sea. Again
he might come out unscathed. Even if he was killed, how should she hear
of his death? And if he survived, was it fair that she should be bound
by law eternally to a living ghost? Somebody had said that before. It
was Olifant. Olifant, the fool out for Grails, yet speaking the truth of
chivalry. Well, this time—he summoned up the confidence of dismal
hope—he would make sure that he was dead and that she heard the news.
At any rate, he had prepared the ground; Boronowski would communicate
with Olifant.

Then came a knock at his door—it was nearly midnight. The night porter
entered. A man downstairs wished to see him—a foreigner. A matter of
urgent importance.

“Show him up,” said Triona.

He groaned, put both his hands up to his head. He did not want to see
Boronowski to-night. His distraught brain could not stand the patriot’s
tireless lucidity of purpose. Boronowski belonged to the inhuman band of
fanatics, the devotees to one idea, who had nothing personal to
sacrifice. Just like lonely old maids who gave themselves up to
church-going and good works, and thereby plumed themselves on the
acquisition of immortal merit. What soul-shattering tragedy had
Boronowski behind him, any more than the elderly virgins aforesaid? If
Boronowski kept him up talking Poland till three o’clock in the
morning—as he had already done—he would go mad. No, not to-night. The
mounting steps on the uncarpeted stairs hammered at every nerve in his
body. And when the door opened, it was not Boronowski who appeared, but
a pallid, swarthy wisp of a man whom Triona recognized as one Klinski, a
Jew, and a trusted agent of Boronowski. He was so evilly dressed that
the night porter, accustomed to the drab clientele of the sad hostelry,
yet thought it his duty to linger by the door.

Triona dismissed him sharply.

“What’s the matter?” he asked in Russian, for he was aware of the man’s
scanty English.

Klinski did not know. He was but the bearer of a letter, a large
envelope, which he drew from his breast pocket. Triona tore it open. It
contained two envelopes and a covering letter. The letter ran:

    “My Dear Friend,

    “A sudden change in the political situation has made it
    necessary for me to go—where I must not tell you. So, to my
    great regret, I cannot accompany you. You, however, will start
    by the morning train, as arranged. The route, as you know, is
    Paris, Zurich, Saltzburg, and Prague. I enclose letters to sound
    friends in Prague and Warsaw who will relieve you of all worries
    and responsibilities. If you do not hear from me in Prague,
    where I should like you to remain one week—it is a beautiful
    city, and the Czecho-Slovak Republic is one of the most
    interesting outcomes of the war—await instructions at Warsaw.
    But I anticipate picking you up in Prague.

                                                             “Yours,
                                                          “Boronowski.”

A moment ago, he had dreaded the interruption of Boronowski on his
nerve-racked vigil. Now the dismayed prospect of a journey across Europe
alone awoke within him a sudden yearning for Boronowski’s society. A
dozen matters could be cleared up in an hour’s talk. Suppose
Boronowski’s return to Warsaw were indefinitely delayed.

“Thanks very much,” he said. “I’ll take back the answer to Mr.
Boronowski myself.”

“There can be no answer,” said Klinski.

“Why?”

“Mr. Boronowski left his lodgings early this evening, and has gone—who
knows where?”

Triona shrugged his shoulders. It was the uncomfortable way of
conspirators all the world over. To himself he cursed it with
heatedness, but to no avail.

“Why didn’t you bring the letter before?” he asked.

“I have had many messages to deliver to-night, sir,” said Klinski, “and
I have not finished.”

The stunted, pallid man looked tired out, half-starved. Triona drew from
his pocket a ten-shilling note. Klinski drew back a step.

“I thank you. But in the service of my country I can only accept payment
from my Government.”

Triona regarded him in admiration.

“It must be a great country!”

“It is,” said Klinski, with a light in his eyes.

“And I’m proud to go and fight for her.”

“It’s a privilege that I envy you,” said Klinski. “May God preserve
you.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Driven by the impossibility of sleep in the frowsy room, by the
incurable wander-fever which took him at periods of unrest, he found
himself an hour later standing before the block of flats in the
Buckingham Palace Road, staring up at the windows of his home. In the
bedroom was a faint streak of light quite visible from below through a
crack in the curtains. He remembered how, a year ago, he had been
compelled by a similar impulse, to stand romantically beneath the
building which housed her sacredness, and how the gods, smiling on him,
had delivered her into his rescuing hands. And now there were no
gods—or if there were, they did but mock him. No white wraith would
appear on the pavement, turning to warm flesh and blood, demanding his
succour. She was up there, wakeful, behind that streak of light.

He stood racked by an agony of temptation. The Yale latch key was still
at the end of his watch-chain. He was her husband. He had the right of
entrance. His being clamoured for her, and found utterance in a horrible
little cry. The light invited him like a beacon. Yes. He would cross the
road. Perhaps the fool Olifant was right. She might yet love him. And
then, as if in answer to his half-crazed imaginings, the light went out.

He turned, and walked wearily back across sleeping London.

It was four o’clock when the night porter admitted him. He stumbled to
his room. As his train left Victoria at eight, it would be an absurdity
to undress and go to bed. Utterly weary, he threw himself on it as he
was, his brain whirling. There could be no question of sleep.

Yet suddenly he became conscious of daylight. He started up and looked
at his watch. It was past seven. He had slept after all. He made a
perfunctory toilet and hurriedly completed his neglected packing. The
drowsy night porter, on duty till eight, tardily answered his summons,
and took his suit-case to the shabby vestibule. Triona followed, with
heavy great coat and canvas kit-bag, his purchases for the campaign. The
porter suggested breakfast. There was no time. Luckily he had paid his
bill the evening before. All he demanded was a taxi.

But at that early hour of the morning there were none, save a
luggage-laden few bound for St. Pancras or King’s Cross.

“I can’t leave the hotel, sir,” said the porter, “or I would get you one
from Euston.”

“I’ll find one, then,” said Triona, and putting on the heavy khaki coat
and gripping suit-case in one hand and kit-bag in the other, he set off
along the Euston Road. As he neared the station entrance, he staggered
along, aching and sweating. What a fool he had been not to foresee this
idiot difficulty! What a fool he had been to give way to sleep. He came
in view of the clock. Given a cab, he would still have time to catch the
train at Victoria. He had it on his brain that his salvation depended on
his catching the train at Victoria. He stumbled into the outer court,
past the hotel wings. An outgoing taxi-cab swirled towards him. He
dropped his burdens and stood in its path with upheld arms. There was a
sudden pandemonium of hoarse cries, a sounding of brakes. He glanced
round just in time to see, for a fraction of a second, the entering
motor-lorry which struck him down.


                              CHAPTER XIX

OLIVIA struggled for a fortnight against Circumstance, when Circumstance
got the upper hand.

But it had been a valiant fight from the moment Myra, on her return to
the flat, had delivered Triona’s scribbled note, and had given her
account of the brief parting interview.

“It’s just as well,” she said. “It’s the only way out.”

She made a brave show of dining, while Myra waited stoically. At last,
impelled to speech, she said:

“Well, what do you think of it?”

“How can I think of what I know nothing about?” said Myra.

“Would you like to know?”

“My liking has nothing to do with it,” said Myra brushing the crumbs off
the table. “If you tell me, you tell me because it may help you. But—I
know it’s not a Christian thing to say—I’m not likely to forgive the
man that has done you an injury.”

“He has done me no injury,” said Olivia. “That’s what I want you to
know. No injury in the ordinary sense of the word.”

She looked up at Myra’s impassive face, and met the dull blue eyes, and
found it very difficult to tell her, in spite of lifelong intimacy. Yet
it was right that Myra should have no false notions.

“I’ve discovered that my husband’s name is not Alexis Triona. It is John
Briggs.”

“John Briggs,” echoed Myra.

“His father was a labourer in Newcastle. He was a chauffeur in Russia.
All that he had said about himself and written in his book is untrue.
When he left us last summer to go to Finland, he really went to
Newcastle to his mother’s death-bed. Everything he has told me has been
a lie from beginning to end. He—oh, God, Myra——”

She broke down and clutched her face, while her throat was choking with
dry sobbing. Myra came swiftly round the table and put her arm about
her, and drew the beloved head near to her thin body.

“There, there, my dear. You can tell me more another time.”

Olivia let herself be soothed for a while. Then she pulled herself
together and rose.

“No, I’ll tell you everything now. Then we’ll never need talk of it
again. I’m not going to make a fool of myself.”

She stiffened herself against feminine weakness. At the end of the
story, Myra asked her:

“What are you going to do?”

“I’m going to carry on as if nothing had happened. At any rate for the
present.”

Myra nodded slowly. “You’re not the only one who has had to carry on as
if nothing had happened.”

“What do you mean?” Olivia asked quickly.

“Nothing but what I said,” replied Myra. “It takes some doing. But
you’ve got to believe in God and believe in yourself.”

“Where did you get your wisdom from, Myra?” asked Olivia wonderingly.

“From life, my dear,” replied Myra with unwonted softness. And picking
up the last tray of removed dinner things, she left the room.

The next afternoon, she said to Myra, “Major Olifant has telephoned me
that Mr. Triona is arriving at Paddington by a six-fifteen train. I
should like you to come with me.”

“Very well,” said Myra.

It was characteristic of their relations that they spoke not a word of
Triona during their drive to the station or during their wait on the
platform. When the train came in, and they had assured themselves that
he had not arrived—for they had taken the precaution to separate and
each to scan a half-section—they re-entered their waiting taxi-cab and
drove home.

“I hope I shall never see him again,” said Olivia, humiliated by this
new deception. “He told Major Olifant he was coming straight to town by
the train. The truth isn’t in him. You mustn’t suppose,” she turned
rather fiercely to Myra, “that I came to meet him with any idea of
reconciliation. That’s why I brought you with me. But people don’t part
for ever in this hysterical way. There are decencies of life. There are
the commonplace arrangements of a separation.”

She burned with a new sense of wrong. Once more he had eluded her. Now,
what she told Myra was true. She wished never to see him again.

Blaise Olifant came up to town, anxious to be of service, and found her
in this defiant mood.

“It’s impossible for it all to end like this,” he said. “You are wounded
to the quick. He’s in a state of crazy remorse. Time will soften things.
He’ll come to his senses and return and ask your forgiveness, and you
will give it.”

She replied, “My dear Blaise, you don’t understand. The man I loved and
married doesn’t exist.”

“The man of genius exists. Listen,” said he. “After he left me, I’ve
done scarcely anything but think of the two of you. He could have put
forward a case—a very strong case—but he didn’t.”

“And what was his strong case?” she asked bitterly.

Olifant put before her his reasoned apologia for the life of Triona.
Given the first deception practised under the obsession of the little
black book acting on a peculiarly sensitive temperament, the rest
followed remorselessly.

“He was being blackmailed by one lie.”

“My intelligence grasps what you say,” Olivia answered, “but my heart
doesn’t. You’re standing away and can see things in the round. I’m in
the middle of them, and I can’t.”

If she, although his wife, had stood away; if she had been dissociated
from his deceptions; if nothing more had occurred than the exposure of
the Triona myth, she might have forgiven him. But the deceptions had
been interwoven with the sacred threads of her love; she could not
forgive that intimate entanglement. To a woman the little things are as
children, as the little ones whose offenders Christ cursed with the
millstone and the sea. She had lain awake, his forgotten wrist-watch on
her arm, picturing him tossed by the waves of the North Sea in the
execution of her country’s errand. She had proudly told a hundred people
of the Bolshevist gyve-marks around his ankle. She had been moved to her
depths by the tragical romance of the fictitious Vronsky. In her heart
there had been hot rebellion against a Foreign Office keeping
strangle-hold on a heroic servant and restricting his freedom of action.
These little sufferings he had caused her she could not forgive. While
inflicting them, he knew that she suffered.

In vain did Olifant, unversed in the psychology of woman, plead the
cause of the erratic creature that was her husband. In vain did he set
out his honourable and uncontested record; that of a man whose response
to the call of duty was unquestioned; of whose courage and endurance she
had received personal testimony; who had cheerfully suffered wounds, the
hardships of flight through Revolutionary Russia, the existence on a
mine-sweeper on perilous seas ending in the daily dreaded catastrophe;
the record of a man who, apart from his fraud, had justified himself as
a queer, imaginative genius, writing of life in a new way, in a new,
vibrating style that had compelled the attention of the English-speaking
world. In vain did he adduce the boyish charm of the man. Olivia sighed.

“I don’t know him as you see him,” she said.

“Then what can I do?” he asked.

She shook a despairing head. “Nothing, my dear Blaise.” She rubbed the
palm of one hand on the back of the other, and turned her great dark
eyes on him. “You can’t do anything, but you’ve done something. You’ve
shown me how loyal a man can be.”

He protested vaguely. “My dear Olivia . . .”

“It’s true,” she said. “And I’ll always remember it. And now, don’t let
us ever talk about this again.”

“As you will,” said he. “But what are you going to do?”

She replied as she had done to Myra. She would carry on.

“Until when?”

She shrugged her shoulders. She would carry on indefinitely. To act
otherwise would open the door to gossip. She was not going to be done to
death by slanderous tongues. She rose and stood before him in slim,
rigid dignity.

“If I can’t out-brave the world, I’m a poor thing.”

“You stay here, then?” he asked.

“Why not? Where else should I go?”

“I came with a little note from my sister,” said Olifant, drawing a
letter from his pocket and handing it to her.

Olivia read it through. Then she said, in a softened voice:

“You’re a dear, kind friend.”

“It’s my sister,” he smiled; but he could not keep an appeal out of his
eyes. “Why shouldn’t you?” he asked suddenly. “It will be hateful for
you here, for all your courage. And you’ll be fighting what? Just
shadows, and you’ll expend all your strength in it. What good will it do
you or anybody? You want rest, real rest, of body and soul.”

She met his eyes.

“Do I look so woebegone?”

“The sight of you now is enough to break the heart of any one who cares
for you, Olivia,” he said soberly.

“It’s merely a question of sleeplessness. That’ll pass off.”

“It will pass off quicker in the country,” he urged. “It will be a
break. The house will be yours. Mary and I, the discreetest shadows. You
don’t know the self-effacing dear that Mary is. Besides, she is one of
those women who is a living balm for the wounded. To look at her is to
draw love and comforting from her.” He ventured the tips of his fingers
on her slender shoulders. “Do come. Your old room shall be yours, just
as you left it. Or the room I have always kept sacred.”

She stood by the fireplace, her arm on the mantelshelf, looking away
from him.

“Or, if you like,” he went on, “we’ll clear out—we only want a few
days—and give you back your old home all to yourself.”

She stretched out a groping hand; he took it.

“I know you would,” she said. “It’s—it’s beautiful of you. I’m not
surprised, because—” she swayed head and shoulders a bit, seeking for
words, her eyes away from him, “—because, after that first day at
Medlow, I have never thought of you as doing otherwise than what was
beautiful and noble. It sounds silly. But I mean it.”

She withdrew her hand and walked away into the room, her back towards
him. He strode after her.

“That’s foolishness. I’m only an ordinary, decent sort of man. In the
circumstances, good Lord! I couldn’t do less.”

She faced him in the middle of the room.

“And I as an ordinary, decent woman, couldn’t do less than what I’ve
said.”

“Well?” said he.

They stood for a few seconds eye to eye. A faint colour came into her
cheeks, and she smiled.

“Don’t suppose I’m not tempted. I am. But if I came, you’d spoil me.
I’ve got to fight.”

This valiant attitude he could not induce her to abandon. At last, with
a pathetic air of disappointment, he said:

“If I can help you in any other way, and you won’t let me, I shall be
hurt.”

“Oh, I’ll let you,” she cried impulsively. “You may be sure. Who else is
there?”

He went away comforted. Yet he did not return to Medlow. These early
days, he argued, were critical. Anything might happen, and it would be
well for him to remain within call.

Of what the future held for her she did not think. Her mind was
concentrated on the struggle through the present. She received a woman
caller and chattered over tea as though nothing had happened. The effort
braced her, and she felt triumphant over self. She went about on her
trivial shopping. She remembered a fitting for a coat and skirt which
she had resolved to postpone till after the projected motor jaunt. If
she was to live in the world, she must have clothes to cover her. One
morning, therefore, she journeyed to the dressmaker’s in Hanover Street,
and, the fitting over, wandered through the square, down Conduit Street
into Bond Street. At the corner, she ran into Lydia, expensively
dressed, creamy, serene.

“My dear, you’re looking like a ghost. What have you been doing with
yourself?”

“Jogging on as usual,” said Olivia.

Their acquaintance had not been entirely broken. A few calls had been
exchanged. Once Lydia had lunched with Olivia alone in the Buckingham
Palace Road. But they had not met since the early part of the year. They
strolled slowly down Bond Street. Lydia was full of news. Bobby Quinton
had married Mrs. Bellingham—a rich woman twice his age.

“The way of the transgressor is soft,” said Olivia.

Mauregard was transferred to Rome. His idol, the Russian dancer, had run
off with Danimède, the fitter at Luquin’s. Hadn’t Olivia heard?

“Where have you been living, my dear child? In a tomb? It has been the
talk of London for the past six weeks. They’re in Paris now, and they
say she lies down on the floor and lets the little beast kick her. She
likes it. There’s no accounting for tastes. Perhaps that’s why she left
Mauregard.”

In her serene, worldly way, she went through the scandalous chronicles
of her galley. She came at last to Edwin Mavenna. Olivia remembered
Mavenna? She laughed indulgently. Olivia shuddered at the memory and
gripped her hands tight. Mavenna—he mattered little. A beast let loose
for a few moments from the darkness. He was eclipsed from her vision by
the boyish, grey-clad figure in the moonlight. She scarcely heard
Lydia’s chatter.

“One must live and let live, you know, in this world. He and Sydney are
partners now. I hinted something of the sort at the time. You don’t mind
now, do you?”

“Not a bit. Why should I?” said Olivia.

“That’s really why I’ve not asked you down to our place in Sussex. But
if you don’t mind meeting him—he’s quite a good sport really.”

Olivia’s eyes wandered up and down the crowded roadway.

“I wish I could see an empty taxi,” she said.

She had a sudden horror of Lydia—a horror queerly mingled with fierce
jealousy. Why should Lydia, with her gross materialism, be leading this
unruffled existence?

“Are you in a hurry?” Lydia asked placidly.

“I’ve an appointment with—my dentist.”

“We’ll get in here and wait till we see a taxi,” said Lydia.

They stood in the recess of a private doorway, by the bow-window of a
print shop.

“You’re not looking well, my dear,” said Lydia quite affectionately.
“Marriage doesn’t seem to agree with you. What’s the matter?”

Olivia flashed: “Nothing’s the matter.”

“How’s your husband?”

“Very well.”

This was intolerable. She strained her eyes for the little red flag of
freedom. Then, as she had told her visitor of a day or two before:

“He’s gone abroad—on important business.”

“And not taken you with him?”

“His business isn’t ordinary business,” she said instinctively. Then she
recognized she was covering him with his own cloak. Her pale cheeks
flushed.

“So that’s it,” said Lydia smiling. “You’re a poor little grass widow.
You want bucking up, my dear. A bit of old times. Come and do a dinner
and a theatre with us. Sydney would love to see you again. We’ll steer
clear of naughty old Mavenna——”

She had to stop; for Olivia had rushed across the pavement and was
holding up her little embroidered bag at arm’s length, and the
Heaven-sent taxi was drawing up to the kerb.

Lydia followed her and stood while she entered the cab.

“You’ll come, won’t you, dear?”

“I’ll telephone,” said Olivia. She put out a hand. “Good-bye. It has
been so pleasant seeing you again.”

Lydia shook hands and smiled in her prosperous, contented way. Then she
said:

“Where shall he drive to?”

Olivia had not given the matter a thought. She reflected swiftly. If she
said “Home,” Lydia would suspect her eagerness to escape. After all, she
didn’t want to hurt Lydia’s feelings. She cried at random:

“Marlborough Road, St. John’s Wood.”

“What a funny place for a dentist to live,” said Lydia.

Anyhow, it was over. She was alone in the taxi, which was proceeding
northwards up Bond Street. Of all people in the world Lydia was the one
she least had desired to meet. Dinner and Revue. Possibly supper and a
dance afterwards! Back again to where she had started little over a year
ago. She suddenly became aware of herself shrieking with laughter. In
horror, she stopped short, and felt a clattering shock all through her
frame, like a car going at high speed when, at the instant of danger,
all the brakes are suddenly applied. She lay back on the cushions,
panting. Her brow was moist. She put up her hand and found a wisp of
hair sticking to her temples.

The cab went on. Where was she? Where was she going? She looked out of
the window and recognized Regent’s Park. Then she remembered her
wildly-given destination. She put her head through the window.

“I’ve changed my mind,” she said to the driver. “Go to Buckingham Palace
Mansions.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

The next morning came a letter from Lydia on expensive primrose
note-paper. Would Friday be convenient? Sydney and herself would call
for her at seven. There was a postscript:

“I hope the St. John’s Wood dentist didn’t hurt you too much.”

It gave her an idea. She replied:

“So sorry. The St. John’s Wood dentist has made it impossible for me to
appear in public for at least a month.”

She checked an impulse of laughter. She must keep hold on herself.

Olifant came in the afternoon. She told him of a communication she had
received from her bank to the effect that Alexis had placed a large sum
of money to her account. But she did not tell him of her meeting with
Lydia.

“What’s to be done with the money? I don’t want it. It had better be
retransferred.”

“I’ll see what I can do,” said Olifant.

He came back next morning. He had seen the manager of Triona’s bank.
Nothing could be done. Alexis had drawn out his balance in cash and
closed his account.

“Let things be—at any rate for the present,” Olifant counselled.

When he took his leave, he said, looking down on her from his lean
height:

“I do wish you would come to Medlow.”

She knew that she was ill. She knew that she was looking ill. But her
little frame shook with an impatient movement.

“I’m going to stick it, Blaise. I’m going to stick it if I die for it.”

“It’s magnificent, but it isn’t war—or anything else,” said he.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Then came Rowington. The last straw. The last straw, in the guise of an
anxious, kindly, gold-spectacled, clean-shaven, florid-faced
philanthropist. First he had asked over the telephone for Triona’s
address. An urgent matter. Olivia replied that his address was secret.
Would she kindly forward a letter? She replied that none of her
husband’s letters were to be forwarded. Would Mrs. Triona see him, then?
He would wait on her at any time convenient to her. She fixed the hour.
He came on the stroke.

Olivia, her heart cold, her brain numbed by a hundred apprehensions, was
waiting for him in the drawing-room. Myra announced him. Olivia rose.

“My dear Mrs. Triona,” said he, emphasizing the conventional handshake
by laying his hand over hers and holding it, “where is that wonderful
husband of yours?”

“He’s gone abroad,” said Olivia.

“He must come back,” said Rowington.

“He has gone away for a long time on important business,” said Olivia,
parrot-wise.

She motioned him to a chair. They sat down.

“I gathered something of the sort from his letter. Has he told you of
certain dispositions?”

She fenced. “I don’t quite follow you.”

“This letter——?”

He handed her the letter of instructions with regard to payment of
royalties which he had received from Triona. She glanced through it.

“That’s all right,” she said.

He drew a breath of relief. “I’m glad you know. I had a sort of
idea—anyhow, no matter how important his business is, it’s essential
that he should come back at once.”

“Why?” she asked.

But she had a sickening prescience of the answer. The kindly gentleman
passed his hand over his forehead.

“It’s just a business complication, my dear Mrs. Triona,” he said.

She rose. He too, courteously.

“Is it to do with anything that happened on the night of your
dinner-party?”

“I’m afraid so.”

“Colonel Onslow and Captain Wedderburn?”

He met her eyes.

“Yes,” said he.

“They’ve come to you with all sorts of lies about Alexis.”

“I would give ten years of my life not to wound you, Mrs. Triona,” he
said, in great distress. “I didn’t sleep a wink last night. My honour as
a publisher is involved. But let that pass. I’m thinking more of you.
You only can help me—and your husband. These two gentlemen have come to
me with a challenge. Your husband’s good faith. They ask ‘Is _Through
Blood and Snow_ a bona-fide personal record?’”

“It is,” said Olivia, with her back to the wall.

“He’ll have to prove it.”

“He will,” said Olivia proudly. “What do they propose to do?”

“Have the whole thing cleared up in public—in the Press. My dear Mrs.
Triona,” he said after a few moments’ hesitation, “don’t you see the
false position I’m in? This letter I’ve shown you—it looks like running
away—forgive me if I wound you. But on the face of it, it does. I
daren’t tell them. But of course, if Mr. Triona comes back, he’ll be
able to give all the explanation in the world. I haven’t the remotest
doubt of it—not the remotest doubt. So, whatever his business is, you
must recall him. You see the importance?”

“Yes, I see,” said Olivia tonelessly.

“So will you write and tell him this?”

The truth had to come out. She said:

“As a matter of fact, I don’t know where he is. I can’t communicate with
him.”

She hated the look of incredulous surmise on Rowington’s face. “As soon
as I can, I’ll let him know.”

“Yes, yes,” said Rowington. “You must. You see, don’t you, that both
Onslow and Wedderbum feel it to be their public duty.”

“But they’re both men of decent feeling,” said Olivia. “They wouldn’t
attack a man when they knew he wasn’t here to defend himself.”

“I hope not, my dear Mrs. Triona,” said Rowington. “I sincerely hope
not. I’ll see them again. Indeed, I tried to put them off the whole
thing. I did my best.”

“What’s the exact charge they make against my husband?”

To her utmost power she would defend him. Let her know facts.

He explained. There was a mysterious period of ten months. Captain
Wedderburn asserted that for four of those months her husband was with
the Armoured Column, and for the remaining six he lay wounded in a
Russian hospital. Colonel Onslow maintained that those ten months—he
had his dates exact—are covered in the book by Alexis Triona’s
adventures in Farthest Russia—and that these adventures are identical
with those of another man who related them to him in person.

“That’s definite, at any rate,” said Olivia. “But it’s a monstrous
absurdity all the same. My husband denied the Russian hospital in my
presence. You can tell these gentlemen that what they propose to do is
infamous—especially when they learn he is not here. Will you give them
my message? To hit a man behind his back is not English.”

Rowington saw burning eyes in a dead white face, and a slim, dark figure
drawn up tragically tense. He went home miserably with this picture in
his mind. For all her bravery she had not restored his drooping faith in
Triona.

And Olivia sat, when he had left her, staring at public disgrace.
Against that she could not fight. The man she had loved was a shadow, a
non-existent thing; but she bore his name. She had sworn to keep bright
the honour of the name before the world. And now the world would sweep
it into the dustbin of ignominy. A maddening sense of helplessness,
growing into a great terror, got possession of her.

The next morning, when Myra brought in her letters, she felt ill and
feverish after a restless night. One of the envelopes bore Triona’s
familiar handwriting. She seized it eagerly. It would give some address,
so that she could summon him back to make a fight for his honour. But
there was no address. She read it through, and then broke into shrill
harsh laughter.

“He says he’s going out this morning to fight for the sacred cause of
Poland.”

Myra, who was pottering about the room, turned on her sharply. As soon
as Olivia was quieter, she sent for the doctor. Later in the day, there
came a nurse, and Myra was banished most of the day from the beloved
bedside.

Thus it came about that the next morning no correspondence or morning
papers were brought into Olivia’s room. And that is why Myra, who
preferred the chatty paragraphs to leaders and political news, said
nothing to her mistress of a paragraph stuck away in the corner of the
paper. It was only a few lines—issued by the police—though Myra did
not know that—to the effect that a well-dressed man with papers on him
giving the name of John Briggs had been knocked over by a motor-lorry
the previous morning and had been taken unconscious to University
College Hospital.


                               CHAPTER XX

MYRA stood by the screened-off bed in the long ward and looked
unemotionally at the unconscious man.

“Yes,” she said to the Sister, “that is Mr. John Briggs. I know him
intimately.”

“Are you a relative?”

“He has no relatives.”

“You see, in a case like this, we have to report to the police. It’s
their business to find somebody responsible.”

“I’m responsible,” said Myra.

The Sister looked at the tall, lean woman, so dignified in her well-made
iron grey coat and skirt and plain black hat, and was puzzled to place
her socially. She might be an austere lady of high degree; on the other
hand, she spoke with an odd, country accent. It was, at any rate, nine
hundred and ninety-nine to one that she was a genuine friend of the
patient; but there was the remaining one in a thousand that she belonged
to the race of cranks not unfamiliar in London hospitals.

“It’s only a matter of formality,” said the Sister, “but one must have
some proof.”

So Myra drew her bow at a venture.

“Mr. Briggs was going abroad—to Poland.”

The Sister smiled with relief. In his pocket-book had been found railway
tickets and unsealed letters to people in Prague and Warsaw. So long as
they found some one responsible, it was all that mattered. She proceeded
to explain the case. A broken thigh, broken ribs, and severe concussion.
Possibly internal injuries. The surgeons could not tell, yet.

Myra scanned again the peaked bit of face beneath the headbandages,
which was all that was visible of Alexis Triona, and asked:

“Can he live?”

“It’s doubtful,” said the Sister.

They moved away to the centre of the ward aisle. The Sister talked of
the accident, of the patient’s position.

“He’s a rich man,” said Myra.

“So we gathered,” replied the Sister, who had in her keeping his
pocket-book, stuffed with English bank-notes of high value.

“If anything should happen, you of course will let me know.”

“Your name and address?”

She gave it. The sister wrote it down on a note-pad.

“Could I see him just once more?” Myra asked.

“Certainly.”

They went round the screen. Myra stood looking down on the bit she could
see of the man who had brought catastrophe on her beloved. The shock of
recognition, although expected, aroused her pity. Then her heart surged
with fierce resentment. Serve the lying rascal right. Why hadn’t the
motor-lorry finished the business right away? For all her cultivated
impassivity of demeanour, she stood trembling by the bedside, scarcely
knowing whether she wished him to die or live. Had he crossed her path
unrelated to Olivia, she would have succumbed to his boyish charm. He
had ever been courteous, grasping with his subtle tact the nature of the
bond between her mistress and herself. So she half-loved, half-loathed
him. And yet, all this considered, it would be better for Olivia and for
himself if he were to die. She glanced swiftly around. The Sister had
been called away for a second. She was alone behind the screen. She knew
that if she could take that bandaged head in her gloved hands and shake
it, he would die, and Olivia would be free. She shivered at the
extraordinary temptation. Then reaction came and sped her from his side.

She met the Sister.

“Can I come again to see how he is getting on?”

“By all means.”

“I shouldn’t like him to die,” said Myra.

Said the Sister, somewhat mystified at this negative pronouncement:

“You may be sure we’ll do all we can.”

“I know,” said Myra.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Of these proceedings, and of these conflicting emotions, she said
nothing to Olivia. Nor did she say anything of subsequent visits to the
hospital where Triona still lay unconscious.

In a short time Olivia recovered sufficiently to dispense with the
nurse. The doctor prescribed change of air. Olifant once more suggested
Medlow, and this time she yielded. But on the afternoon before her
departure, while they were packing, she had a strange conversation with
Myra.

She held in her hand, uncertain whether to burn it, the last wild letter
of Alexis.

“I’m glad he’s gone to Poland,” she said reflectively.

“Why?” asked Myra, not looking up from the trunk by which she was
kneeling.

“It’s a man’s work, after all,” said Olivia.

“So’s digging potatoes.”

“I suppose you’re right,” said Olivia.

She tore up the letter and threw the fragments into the fire.

“What a hell marriage can be.”

“It can,” said Myra.

“You’re lucky. You’ve escaped.”

“Have I?” asked Myra intent on the packing of underwear.

At her tone Olivia started. “What do you mean?”

Myra looked up, sitting back on her heels.

“Do you suppose, dearie, you’re the only woman in trouble in the world?”

Olivia moved a step towards her.

“Are you too in trouble, Myra?”

“I’ve been in trouble for the last twenty years, ever since I left your
mother’s house to be married to him.”

Olivia stared at her open-mouthed, lost in amazement. This prim,
puritanical, predestined spinster of a Myra——

“You—married?”

She swerved back into a chair, reeling ever so little under this new
shock. If there had been one indubitable, solid fact in her world, one
that had stood out absolute during all the disillusions of the past
year, it was Myra’s implacable spinsterhood. Why, she had seen Myra
every day of her life, ever since she could remember, except for the
annual holiday. Yes. Those holidays, always a subject for jest with her
father and brothers when they were alive. No one had known whither she
had gone, or when she had emerged on her reappearance. She had never
given an address—so far as Olivia knew. And yet her plunge into the
unknown had received the unquestioned acceptance of the family. Only
last November she had gone in her mysterious way, taking, however, only
a fortnight instead of her customary month. Olivia, Heaven knew why, had
formed the careless impression that she had betaken herself to some
tabby-like Home for religious incurables, run by her dissenting
organization. And all this time, tabby-like in another sense, she had
been stealing back to her husband. Where was Truth in the world? She
repeated mechanically:

“You—married?”

Myra rose stiffly, her joints creaking, and stood before her mistress,
and perhaps for the first time in her life Olivia saw a gleam of light
in the elderly woman’s expressionless pale blue eyes.

“Yes, I’m married. Before the end of my honeymoon, I found he wasn’t in
his right mind. I had to shut him up, and come back to your mother. He’s
alive still, in the County Asylum. I go to see him every year.”

In a revulsion of feeling, Olivia sprang to her feet and held out both
her arms.

“Myra—my dear old Myra——”

Myra suffered the young embrace, and then gently disengaged herself.

“There—there——” she said.

“Why have you never told me?”

“Would it have done you any good?”

“It would have made me much more thoughtful and considerate.”

“I’ve never wanted thought or consideration,” said Myra. “You have. So I
say—would it have done you any good? Not a ha’p’orth. I’ve been much
more use to you as I am. If you want to serve people, don’t go and throw
your private life down their throats. It chokes them. You may think it
won’t—but it does.”

“But why,” asked Olivia with moist eyes. “Why should you want to serve
me like that—your devotion all these years?”

“My duty,” said Myra. “I told you something of the sort a while ago.
What’s the good of repeating things? Besides, there was your mother——”

“Did mother know?”

Myra nodded. “She didn’t know I was going to be married. I was young
then, and afraid. Madam took me out of an orphanage, and I thought I was
bound for life. . . . He came to Medlow to do thatching. That’s how I
met him. His father, one of a large family, had come from Norfolk to
settle in the West. The Norfolk thatchers are known all over England. It
goes down from father to son. His family had been thatchers in the same
village since the Norman Conquest. He was a fine, upstanding man, and in
his way an aristocrat—different from the butcher’s boys and baker’s men
that came to the back door. I loved him with all my heart. He asked me
to marry him. I said ‘Yes.’ We arranged it should be for my next
holiday. Up to then, I had spent my holiday at a seaside place connected
with the orphanage. One paid a trifle. Instead of going there, I went to
his home. It was only when the trouble came that I wrote to your mother.
She said the fewer people who knew, the better. I came back as though
nothing had happened. Whether she told Mr. Gale or not, I don’t know. I
don’t think she did. There was a baby—but, thank God, it was born dead.
Your mother arranged it all, so that no one should be the wiser. You
yourself were the tiniest tot. Perhaps now you see why I have a duty
towards the daughter of an angel from Heaven.”

“And all my life——” Olivia began, but Myra interrupted her
unemotionally.

“I didn’t tell you any of this, because, as I said, it could do you no
good. And it’s your good I’ve lived for. One must have something to live
for, anyway. Some folks live for food, other folks live for religion.
I’d have lived for religion if it wasn’t for you. I’ve struggled and
prayed to find the Way. Often it has been a question of you and Jesus
Christ who has called me to forsake the vain affections of this world.
And I’ve chosen you. I may be damned in Hell for it, but I don’t care.”

She went on her knees again by the trunk, and continued to pack dainty
underwear.

“I’ve told you now, because it may do you good to see that you’re not
the only married woman in trouble. I’d thank you,” she added after a
pause, “to leave me alone with this packing.”

And as Olivia, not daring to yield the fullness of her heart to this
strange, impassive creature, lingered by the door, Myra said:

“You’d best go, dearie, and think it out. At any rate, you haven’t got
to go through the sorrow of the baby business.”

Whether this was consolation or not, Olivia could not decide. If there
had been a child, and it had lived, it might have been a comfort and a
blessing. Nothing in its heredity would have marked it with a curse. But
still—it would have been a lifelong link with the corporeal man whom
she had not married, from whom she shrank, and whom she proclaimed her
desire never to see again. On the other hand, Myra’s revelation gave her
strength and restored her courage. She shuddered at the thought of the
hopeless lunatic in the County Asylum, dragging out dead years of life.
At any rate, she was married to a living man.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Her first days in Medlow passed like a dream. The kindest and gentlest
of women, Mary Woolcombe, Olifant’s sister, ministered to her wants.
Mrs. Woolcombe, too, had made an unhappy marriage, and now lived apart
from her husband, the depraved Oxford don. Thus, with her hostess and
Myra, Olivia found herself within a little Freemasonry of unsuccessful
wives. And one day, when she came to think of it, she laughed out loud.

“We might start a Home,” she said to Myra.

It was only later, when she shook off the strangeness of the dearly
familiar, and grew strong enough to venture out into the streets that
she found sense of perspective. Not so long ago had she set out on her
Great Adventure—only eighteen months. Yet in these she had gathered the
experience of eighteen years. . . .

Save for Blaise Olifant’s study, the house was little changed. The oak
settle in the hall still showed the marks of the teeth of Barabbas, the
bull-terrier pup. The white pane in the blue and red window of the
bathroom still accused the youthful Bobby, now asleep for ever beneath
the sod of Picardy. Her own old room, used by Mrs. Woolcombe, was
practically unaltered. She stared into it as she rambled about the
house, and felt that she had done right in not dispossessing its present
occupant. All her girlhood was contained within those four walls, and
she could not go back to it. The room would be haunted by its
inconsiderable ghosts. She preferred her mother’s room, which, though
scrupulously kept aired and dusted, had remained under lock and key.
There, if ghosts counted for aught, would a spirit pervade of exquisite
sympathy.

As Olifant had promised, she found herself in a strange, indefinable
way, again mistress of the house, although she could take no part in its
practical direction. He had spoken truth of his sister, whom she loved
at first sight. Mary Woolcombe was plump, rosy, and brown-haired, with
her brother’s dark blue eyes. On their first evening leave-taking,
Olivia had been impelled to kiss her, and had felt the responsive warmth
of a sisterly bosom.

“I do hope you feel at home,” Olifant asked one day after lunch.

“You seem like guests, not hosts,” replied Olivia.

“It’s dear of you to say so,” said Mary Woolcombe, “but I wish you’d
prove it by asking your friends to come and see you.”

“I will,” replied Olivia.

But she flushed scarlet, and, as soon as she was alone, she grappled
with realities. And realities nearly always have a nasty element of the
ironical. She remembered the first cloud that swept over her serene soul
during the honeymoon bliss of The Point. They had discussed their future
domicile. Alexis had suggested the common-sense solution—“The Towers”
as headquarters. She, with the schoolgirl stigma of Landsdowne House
upon her, and possessed by the bitter memory of the nose-in-the-air
attitude of the Blair Park crocodile—eternal symbol of social
status—had revolted at the suggestion. He, the equal and companion of
princes, looked on her—and, if his last crazy letter signified
anything—looked still on her, as the high-born lady—the Princess of
his dreams. Each, therefore, had deceived the other. She, the daughter
of Gale and Trivett, auctioneers and estate agents, and so, by the
unwritten law, cut off from the gentry of Medlow, had undergone agony of
remorse for the sake of the son of a Tyneside operative, a boy before
the mast, a common chauffeur, a man far her inferior in the social
scale. No wonder he could not understand her hesitancies. Her resentment
against him blazed anew. For his sake she had needlessly soiled her soul
with deceit and snobbery. It was well that he had passed out of her
life.

“May I invite Mr. Trivett and Mr. Fenmarch to tea?” she asked.

Mary Woolcombe smiled.

“The house is yours, dear. That’s not a Spanish courtesy but an English
fact.”

So the two old gentlemen came, and Olivia entertained them in the
dining-room, as she had done on the afternoon of her emancipation. She
sat at the end of the comfortably laid table, and the dusty Fenmarch,
with the face of an old moulting badger, drank tea, while, as before,
the stout, red-gilled Trivett drank whisky and soda with his hot scones.
This time, the latter explained that the whisky was a treat—forbidden
by Mrs. Trivett at the domestic tea-table. They welcomed her back in the
kindness of their simple hearts. They knew nothing of her separation
from Triona. She had been ill and come down for rest and change.

“And you look as if you need it, my dear,” said Mr. Trivett. “And some
of your good father’s old port. There should still be a dozen or two of
Cockburn’s ‘70 in the cellar at the present moment—unless Major Olifant
has drunk it all.”

Olivia laughed, for it was humorously meant. Mr. Fenmarch in the act of
raising his teacup to his lips, put it down again with a sigh and shook
his dusty head.

“It was a great wine,” he said with a look backward into the past.

“We’ll have a bottle up,” cried Olivia.

In spite of polite protests, she rang for Myra, and to Myra she gave
instructions. And presently Myra, trained from girlhood in the nice
conduct of wine, appeared with the cob-webbed bottle, white splash
uppermost, tenderly tilted in unshaking hands. Trivett took it from her
reverently while she sought corkscrew and napkin and glasses, and when
she placed the napkin pad on the table, and Trivett took the corkscrew,
Fenmarch, with the air of one participating in a holy rite, laid both
hands on the sacred bottle and watched the extraction of the cork as one
who awaits the manifestation of the god. The brows of both men were
bent, and they held their breaths. Then the cork came out clear and
true, and the broad red face of Trivett was irradiated by an
all-pervading smile. It faded into an instant’s seriousness while he
smelled the cork—it reappeared triumphant as he held the corkscrew,
with cork impaled, beneath the nostrils of Fenmarch. Fenmarch sniffed
and smiled and bowed.

“Olivia, my dear——” said Trivett with a gesture.

Olivia, understanding, held the wine-glasses. The wine flowed clear,
gold dissolved in rubies—is there a colour on earth like the colour of
old port?

“Stop! Only a sip for me,” she laughed.

“Nonsense. It was only for the sake of her health that we let her open
it—eh, Fenmarch?”

But Fenmarch, eager on the pouring, cried:

“Don’t move your glass, for God’s sake, Olivia. You’ll waste it.”

But Trivett, with a false air of chivalry, let her off with half a
glass. Fenmarch refolded the napkin, so as to give the temporarily
abandoned bottle a higher tilt. The two men smelled the wine. For the
first time since the awful night of disillusion, Olivia felt happy.
These old dears! It was like stuffing greedy children with chocolates.

The two elderly gentlemen raised their glasses and bowed to her. Then
sipped.

“Ah!” said Fenmarch.

“H’m,” said Trivett, with the knitted brow of puzzlement.

Then, suddenly the grey, badgery little man who had never been known to
laugh violently, gave Olivia the shock of her life. He thrust his chair
from the table and smacked his thigh and exploded in a high-pitched
cackle of hilarity.

“He can’t taste it! He’s been drinking whisky! He has paralysed his
palate. I’ve been waiting for it!” He beat the air with his hands. “Oh
Lord! That’s good!”

Trivett’s fat jowl fell.

“——” he gasped, regardless of Olivia. “So I have.”

“Moral——” cried the delighted Fenmarch. “Never try to steal a march on
your wife—it doesn’t pay, my boy. It doesn’t pay.”

And he inhaled the aroma of the Heaven-given wine, and drank with the
serenity of the man who has never offended the high gods.

Olivia, anxious to console, said to Mr. Trivett:

“I’ll send you some round to-morrow.”

Trivett spread out his great arms.

“My dear, it’ll have to settle. If moved, it won’t be fit to drink for a
couple of months.”

Eventually he reconciled himself to the loss of the subtler shades of
flavour, and he shared with Fenmarch the drinkable remainder of the
carefully handled bottle.

But it was not for this genial orgy that Olivia had convened the
meeting.

“I owe you two dears an apology,” she said.

They protested. An impossibility.

“I do,” she asserted. “The last time you were here, you gave me good
advice, which I rejected, like a little fool. I insisted on going up to
London with all my money tied up in a bundle, to seek my fortune.”

“Well, my dear,” said Trivett, “haven’t you found it?”

She looked from one to the other, and their wine-cheered faces grew
serious as she slowly shook her head.

“I want to tell you something in confidence. It mustn’t get round the
town—at any rate, not yet. My husband and I aren’t going to live
together any more.”

“God bless my soul!” said Fenmarch.

“So,” she continued, “I’m where I was when I left you. And I don’t want
any more adventures. And if you’d take back my bag of gold—there isn’t
so much in it now—and advise me what to do with it, I should be very
grateful.”

It had cost her some sacrifice of pride to make this little speech. She
had rehearsed it; put it off and off during the pleasant wine-drinking.
She had flouted them once for two unimaginative ancients, and now
dreaded, the possible grudge they might have against her. “If you had
only listened to us,” they might say, with ill-concealed triumph. If
they had done so, she would have accepted it as punishment for her
overbearing conceit and for her snobbery. But they received her news
with a consternation so affectionate and so genuine that her eyes filled
with tears.

“You won’t ask me why,” she said. “It’s a complicated story—and
painful. But it has nothing whatever to do with—with things people are
divorced for. I should like you to understand that.”

“Then surely,” said the old lawyer, “as the usual barrier to a
reconciliation doesn’t exist, there may still be hopes——”

“None,” said Olivia. “My husband has done the right thing. He has gone
away—abroad—for ever, and has made it impossible for me to find out
his address.”

“My dear,” said Mr. Trivett, his red face growing redder, “I don’t want
to know none of your private affairs—” he lost hold of grammar
sometimes when deeply moved “—it’s enough for me that you’re in
trouble. I’ve known you ever since you were born, and I loved your
father, who was the honestest man God ever made.” He stretched out his
great, sunglazed hand. “And so, if old Luke Trivett’s any good to you,
my dear, you can count on him as long as he’s this side of the daisies.”

“And I’m your good friend, too,” said Mr. Fenmarch in his dustiest
manner.

When they had gone, Olivia sat for a long while alone in the
dining-room. And she felt as though she had returned to the strong and
dear realities of life after a feverish wandering among shadows.


                              CHAPTER XXI

AFTER this, Olivia took up her life, as she thought, in firm hands. She
had made her reparation to her old friends. She joined the family party
of the Trivetts at dinner, and mixed with the “homely folk” that
assembled around old John Freke’s tea table. She lived in a glow of
contrition for past snobberies. The vague story of her separation from
Triona which she had told to the two old men not sufficing Medlow
curiosity, she told what she believed to be the truth.

“My husband has gone to Poland to fight against the Russian Reds.”

And thereby she gave the impression that the cause of the break up of
her married life was the incurable adventurous spirit of her husband.
The suggestion fitted in with the town’s idea of the romance of her
marriage and the legendary character of Alexis Triona, which had
originally been inspired by the local bookseller eager to sell copies of
Triona’s books. She herself, therefore, became invested in a gossamer
garment of mystery, which she wore with becoming grace. Her homecoming
was a triumph.

As the days passed and brought no news of Alexis, she grew convinced of
the honesty of his last letter. His real achievements in the past
confirmed her conviction. He was the born adventurer. It was like him to
have sought the only field of mad action open at that hour of
frantically guarded peace. He had gone to Poland. In her heart she
rejoiced. She saw him striving to burn a past record and rise,
Phœnix-like, from its ashes.

“If he came back a Polish General, all over stars and glory,” said Myra,
during one of their increasingly intimate conversations, “would you take
up with him again?”

Olivia reddened. “I should be glad for his sake.”

“I don’t see that you’re answering my question,” said Myra.

“I’ve told you once and for all,” flashed Olivia, “that I’ll have
nothing more to do with him as long as I live.”

She meant it with all that she knew of her soul. His fraud was
unforgivable; his perfect recognition of it constituted his only merit.
In Poland, doing wild things, he was a picturesque and tolerable
personage. In her immediate neighbourhood, he became once again a
repellent figure. As far as she could, she blotted him out of her
thoughts.

The threat of exposure at the hands of Onslow and Wedderburn still hung
over her head. The disgrace of it would react on her innocent self. The
laughter of the Lydian galley rang in her ears. She guessed the cynical
gossip of the newer London world. That was hateful enough. She need
never return to either. But it would follow her to Medlow. She would be
pitied by the Trivetts and the Frekes, and the parents of the present
generation of Landsdowne House. They would wonder why, in the face of
the revelations, she still called herself “Mrs. Triona.” To spring her
plain Mrs. Briggs-dom on Medlow she had not the courage.

She took counsel with Blaise Olifant. In his soldier-scholar protecting
way he seemed a rock of refuge. He said:

“Write to them through Rowington and ask them to hold their hands until
you can put them into communication with your husband, which you give
your word of honour to do as soon as you learn his address.”

She did so. The bargain was accepted. When she received Rowington’s
letter, she danced into Olifant’s study, and, sitting on the corner of
his table, flourished it in his face.

“Oh, the relief of it! I feel ten years younger. I was on the verge of
becoming an old woman. Now it will never come out.”

Olifant leaned back in his chair and looked at her wistfully. A faint
flush coloured her cheeks, and her eyes were lit with the gladness of
hundreds of days ago. Her lips were parted, showing the white, girlish
teeth. Sitting there, vividly alive, in the intimate attitude, smiling
on him, she was infinitely desirable.

“No,” said he. “It will never come out.”

A cloud passed over her face. “Still, one never knows——”

“I have faith in Alexis,” said he. “He’s a man of his word.”

“I think you’re the loyalest creature that ever lived.”

He raised a deprecating hand. “I would I were,” said he.

“What do you mean by that?” she asked pleasantly.

“If I were,” said he, his nose seeming to lengthen over the wry smile of
his lips, “if I were, I would go out into the world and not rest till I
brought him back to you.”

She slid to her feet. “With a barber’s basin for a helmet, and the rest
of the equipment. If you did such an idiot thing, I should hate you.
Don’t you understand that he has gone out of my life altogether?”

“Life is a long, long time to look forward to, for a woman so young as
yourself.”

“You mean, I might fall in love with somebody else, and there would be
horrid complications?” She laughed in the cocksureness of youth. “Oh,
no, my dear Blaise. Once bitten, twice shy. Three times, four times, all
the multiplication table times shy.”

Though impelled by primitive instinct, he could not press her further.
He found himself in a position of poignant absurdity, compensated by the
sweetness of their daily companionship. Sometimes he wondered how it
could be that an awakened woman like Olivia could remain in calm
ignorance of his love. Yet she gave never a sign of knowledge. She
accepted friendship with full hands and gave it with full heart. Beyond
that—nothing. From his sensitive point of view, it was all for the
best. If, like a lean spider, he sat down beside her and talked of love,
he would indubitably frighten Miss Muffet away from Medlow. Further, she
would hold him in detestation for intentions which, in the queer
circumstances, had no chance of being what the world calls honourable.
He therefore put up with what he could get. The proclamation of her
eternal man-shyness sounded like her final word on her future existence.
So he came back to Rowington.

“I’m glad that’s all settled,” said he. “Now you can take up the threads
of life again.”

“What do you think I can make of them?” she asked.

“I can’t sit here idle all my life—not here, at ‘The Towers,’” she
laughed, “for I’m not going to inflict myself on you for a lifetime—but
here, in the world.”

He had no practical suggestion to make; but he spoke from the sincerity
of his tradition.

“A woman like you fulfils her destiny by being her best self.”

“But being good is scarcely an occupation.”

He smiled. “I give it up, my dear. If you like, I can teach you
geology——”

She laughed. Geology had to do with dead things. She cared not a hang
for the past. She wanted to forget it. The epoch of the dynosaurus and
the period of the past year were, save for a few hundreds of centuries,
contemporaneous. No past, thank you. The present and the future for her.
The present was mere lotus-eating; delightful, but demoralising. It was
the future that mattered.

“If only you were an astrologer, and could bind me apprentice,” she
said. “No,” she added after a pause. “There’s nothing for it. I must do
something. I think I’ll go in for Infant Welfare and breed bull-dogs.”

She watched him as he laboriously stuffed his pipe with his one hand by
means of a little winch fixed to the refectory table and lit it by a
match struck on a heavy mat stand; refraining from helping him, although
all the woman in her longed to do so, for she knew his foibles. The very
first time he had entered the house, he had refused her offer of help
with his Burberry. He needed a woman to look after him; not a sister;
not a landlady-lodger friend; a wife, in fact, whose arm and hand he
would accept unquestionably, in lieu of his own. A great pity sprung in
her heart. Why had no woman claimed him—a man stainless in honour,
exquisite in thought, loyal of heart, and—not the least qualification
for the perfect gentle knight in a woman’s eyes—soldier-like in
bearing? There was something missing. That was all the answer she could
give herself. Something intangible. Something magnetic, possessed by the
liar and scamp who had been her husband. She could live with Blaise
Olifant for a hundred years in perfect amity, in perfect sympathy . . .
but with never a thrill.

She knew well enough the basis of sentiment underlying his friendship.
If she were free to marry, he would declare himself in his restrained
and dignified way. But with the barrier of the living Alexis between
them, she laughed at the possibility of such a declaration. And yet, her
inward laughter was tinged with bitterness. What kind of a man was it,
who, loving a woman, did not catch her round the waist and swing her on
his horse and ride away with her? Of course, she herself would have
something to say in the matter. She would fight tooth and nail. She
would fling the ravisher to Kingdom Come. But still her sex would have
the gratification of being madly desired.

In some such confused way, she thought; the horror of Mavenna, and the
romantic mastery of Alexis arising in comparison and contrast. To say
nothing of Bobby Quinton. . . .

“I wonder how you can put up with me,” she said when he had set his pipe
comfortably going.

“Put up with you? What do you mean?”

“You and I are so different.”

He had some glimmer of the things working behind her dark eyes.

“Do you still want adventures? Medlow is too dull for you?”

She felt guilty, and cried impulsively: “Oh, no, no. This is peace. This
is Heaven. This is all I want.”

And for a time she persuaded herself that it was so.

Then there came a day when the lilac and the laburnum were out in the
garden behind the house, and the row of beeches screening it from the
east wind were all a riot of tender green, and Olivia was sitting with a
book in the noon sunshine; and the book lay unread on her lap, for her
thoughts went back to a magical day of greenery in Richmond Park; an
imperishable memory. Her eyes filled with tears. For a few moments, she
had recaptured the lost Alexis in that remembered hour of blue mist and
mystery. And now, he was in Poland. Doing what?

The French window of Olifant’s study opened, and he came down the
gravelled path towards her, a letter in his hand. His face was serious.
She rose to meet him.

“I don’t know whether I ought to show you this—but, perhaps later you
might blame me if I didn’t.”

She uttered a little cry which stuck in her throat.

“Alexis?”

“Yes.”

The eagerness with which she grasped the letter brought a touch of pain
into his eyes. Surely she loved the man still.

“I’m afraid it gives less than news of him,” said he.

But, already reading the letter, she gave no heed to his words.

The letter was from Warsaw, and it ran:

    “Sir,     “I was commissioned by my friend, Mr. John Briggs, to
    communicate with you should anything befall him. Now something
    must have befallen him, because he has failed to keep with me
    very definite engagements into which he had entered with the
    utmost good faith and enthusiasm. He was to start on his journey
    hither, to join the Polish service, on a certain day. He was
    furnished with railway tickets and passports; also, on the night
    before his departure, with a letter to friends in Prague where
    he was to await my coming, and with a letter to friends in
    Warsaw, in case political exigencies should delay my arrival in
    Prague. The Prague letter has not been delivered, nor has Mr.
    Briggs appeared in Warsaw. Nor have I received from him any
    explanatory communication. That he should have changed his mind
    at the last moment is incredible, as his more than zealous
    intentions cannot be questioned.

    This letter, therefore, has a double object; first to acquaint
    you with these facts: and secondly to beg you of your courtesy
    to give me any information you may possess as to the fate of one
    whom I learned to hold in affectionate esteem.

                                                    Yours faithfully,
                                                     “Paul Boronowski.”

Olivia grew very pale. Her hand shook as she gave the letter back to
Olifant.

“Something must have happened to him,” he said.

“What has always happened to him,” she replied bitterly. “He says one
thing and does another. One more senseless extravagant lie.”

“He was obviously going to Poland,” said Olifant.

“But he never started!”

Olifant persisted: “How do you know?”

“What can one ever know about him except that truth has no meaning for
him? If you suggest that he has perished by the way on a railway journey
between here and Prague—” she laughed scornfully. “Really, my dear
Blaise, you’re too good for this world. If you caught a man with his
hand in your waistcoat pocket, and he told you he only wanted to see the
time by your watch, you’d believe him! Haven’t I been through this
before? All this elaborate preparation for missions abroad which never
came off? Didn’t he leave you here to go off to Helsingfors, and John o’
Groats was the nearest to it he got?”

“Then where do you think he is now?”

“Anywhere, except in Poland. It was the last place he had any intention
of going to.”

“He might have written you a false account of his movements,” Olifant
argued, “but why should he have deceived this good Polish gentleman?”

“It’s his way,” she replied wearily. “Oh, don’t you see? He’s always
acting to himself. He can’t help leading a fictitious life. I can guess
the whole thing. He goes to this Mr. Boronowski—one of his stray
Russo-Polish acquaintances—with the idea in his head of putting me off
his scent. Poland still is romantic and a terribly long way off. He
can’t do a thing simply. He must do it fantastically. It’s not enough
that I should think he was going to Poland. Mr. Boronowski must think
so, too. He throws his arms about, persuading himself and everybody else
that he is a Paladin going to fight for the sacred cause of an oppressed
nationality. When the thing’s done, and the letter to me written, the
curtain comes down on the comedy, and Alexis takes off his war paint and
starts off for Pernambuco—or Haverstock Hill.”

“I think you’re unjust, Olivia,” said Olifant.

“And I think you’re too good to be true,” she retorted angrily, and she
left him and went down the garden path into the house.

In her room, her mother’s room, with the old rose curtains and
Chippendale and water colours, she rang the bell. Myra appeared.

“You know so much already, Myra,” she said in her defiant way, “that I
think you ought to know everything. I’ve just heard that Mr. Triona
never went to Poland.”

“Indeed?” said Myra impassively. “Do you know where he is?”

“No. And I don’t want to.”

“I can’t quite understand,” said Myra.

“I wish you would take some interest in the matter.”

“My interest is your interest. If you never want to see him again, what
does it matter where he is? Perhaps you’re afraid he’ll come back to
you?”

At the elder woman’s suggestion, the fear gripped her with dreadful
suddenness. There had not yet been time for thought of such a
possibility. If he had lied about fighting for Polish freedom, what
truth was there in his perfervid declaration of the severance of his
life from hers? She had been right in her analysis of his character. The
curtain down on whatever comedy he might be now enacting, he would
present himself unexpectedly before her with specious explanations of
the past, and another glittering scenario of illusion. And with his
reappearance would come exposure. She had pledged her word to Rowington.

She seized Myra by the wrist. “Do you think he will?”

“You are afraid,” said Myra.

“Yes. Dreadfully afraid.”

“I don’t think you need be,” said Myra.

Olivia flung away. “You take his part, just like Major Olifant. Neither
of you seem to understand.” She turned. “Don’t you see the horror of
it?”

“I’ve seen lots of horrors in my time,” replied Myra placidly. “But I
shan’t see this one. He’s gone for good, dearie. You may be sure of
that.”

“I wish I could think so,” said Olivia.

It was nearly lunch time. Myra went out and returned with a can of hot
water.

“You’ll not see him so long as I’m about to look after you,” she
remarked.

And Olivia laughed at the dragon of her childhood.

Some mornings afterwards, Myra came to her mistress.

“If it’s convenient to you, I should like a few days’ leave. I’ve had a
letter.”

“Nothing serious, I hope?” asked Olivia, whose thoughts flew to the
madman in the County Asylum.

“I don’t know,” said Myra. “Can I go?”

“Of course,” said Olivia.

So Myra packed her worn valise and left Medlow by the first available
train. But the Asylum was not her destination. The next day saw her
seeking admittance to University College Hospital, London.


                              CHAPTER XXII

WHEN Triona after many dim day-dreams and relapses into nothingness, at
last recovered consciousness, he found himself in a narrow sort of
cubicle, staring upwards at a mile away ceiling. He was tightly bound,
body and legs. He had a vague memory of a super-juggernaut of a thing
killing him; therefore he sagely concluded that he was dead and this was
the next world. It occurred to him that the next world had been
singularly over-rated, being devoid of any interest for an intelligent
being. Later, when the familiar figure of a nurse popped round the
screen, he recognized, with some relief, the old universe. He was alive;
but where he was, he had no notion.

Only gradually did he learn what had befallen him; that he had laid for
weeks unconscious; that he had a broken thigh and crushed ribs; that
most of the time he had hovered between life and death; that even now he
was a very sick man who must lie quiet and do exactly what nurses and
doctors told him. This sufficed for a time, while his brain still worked
dully. But soon there came a morning when all the memories surged back.
He questioned the nurse:

“When do you think I can start for Poland?”

“Perhaps in six months,” she replied soothingly.

He groaned. “I want to go there now.”

“What for?”

“To join the Polish Army.”

She had nursed through the war, and knew that men in his plight were of
no further use in armies. Gently she told him so. He stared
uncomprehensively on an empty world.

“What can I do when I leave here?”

“You must have a long, long rest, and do nothing at all and think of
nothing at all.”

He tried to smile at the nurse’s pleasant face. “You’ve done me a bad
turn in bringing me back to life,” said he.

When they thought him capable of grappling with his personal affairs,
they brought him his bulging pocket-book, and bade him count his money.
He laughed. It was quite safe. He handed back the roll of notes into the
nurse’s keeping. But the other contents of the case he looked at
dismally: the passport, with the foreign visas; the railway tickets; the
letters to Prague and Warsaw. What were the good of them now? He would
never go to Poland. When he got strong, all the fighting would be over.
And when he did get strong, in a few months or a year, he would probably
be lame, with odds and ends of organs gone wrong inside him. He tried to
read the letters; but they were written in Polish—unintelligible now in
spite of his strenuous short study of the language. They bore a
signature which he could not decipher. But it was certainly not
Boronowski. His mind soon tired of the puzzle. What was the good of
keeping the letters? Drearily he tore them in pieces and gave them to
the nurse to dispose of, when she brought him a meal.

Tired with the effort he slept. He awoke to a sense of something final
done, or something important left undone. As his brain cleared, he
realized that subconsciously he had been thinking of his duty to
Boronowski. Of course, he must be informed at once of the reason for his
defection.

And then dismay overwhelmed him. He had no address to Boronowski. The
only channels of communication with him, the Prague and Warsaw letters,
he had destroyed. A happy idea struck him. He toyed with it for what
seemed interminable hours until the nurse came to his bedside. He called
for writing materials, which were smilingly denied him. He was too weak.
But the nurse would write a short letter from dictation. He dictated two
identical letters, one to the Polish Legation, one to the Polish
Consulate, asking for the address of Mr. Paul Boronowski, late of 21
Hillditch Street, St. Pancras. By return of post came polite replies
from Legation and Consulate. Both disclaimed any knowledge of the
identity of Mr. Paul Boronowski. Legation and Consulate were blandly
ignorant of the existence of their confidential agents. Then he
remembered the baffling signature to the two letters. He laughed
somewhat bitterly. His life seemed to be involved in a tangle of false
names.

After all, what did it matter? But it did matter, vitally. If ever he
had set his soul on a true thing, he had set it on keeping faith with
Boronowski. And Boronowski like the rest of the world would set him down
as an impostor. In his desperate physical weakness the tears rolled down
his cheeks; and so the nurse found him, with one of the letters clutched
in his thin hand.

“My only friend in the world,” said he.

“Dead?” asked the nurse.

“No. Lost.”

He gave her the letter.

“Surely you have at least one more,” she said. “In fact I have written
to her to tell her of your recovery.”

“_Her?_” He looked at the nurse out of ghastly eyes.

“Miss Myra Stebbings.”

“Oh, my God!” said he, and fainted.

Whereat the nurse, anxious to bring him comforting tidings was
exceedingly troubled. The shock put him back for two or three days. He
grew light-headed, and raved about a woman called Olivia, and about all
sorts of strange and incomprehensible things. When he regained his
senses it was an awakening to a life of even more terrifying
consternation than before. Myra, he learned, had called daily at the
hospital—to be denied access to him till he should be in a fit state to
receive her. The nurse told him of her first visit the morning after the
accident and of the newspaper paragraph which she had chanced to read.
But if Myra knew, surely Olivia knew. And Olivia, knowing him to have
been for weeks at death’s door, had treated him, as though he had
already passed through that door to the other side. Horror gripped him.
He questioned the nurse. This Miss Stebbings, had she left no message?
No, she was a woman of few words. She had said, in an unemotional way:
“I’ll come in again to-morrow.”

“For God’s sake don’t let her see me,” he cried.

But after a while he countermanded the request. He would learn the
worst, and meet steadily the supreme punishment, the tale of Olivia’s
implacable hatred. There were degrees in a woman’s scorn. Much he knew
he had justly incurred; but his sick frame shuddered at this maximum of
contempt and loathing. Ill-conditioned dog he avowed himself; yet to let
him die, for aught she knew, like a dog, without sign or word of
interest . . . it transcended thought.

“Are you sure there has been no other lady? Not a letter of enquiry?
Nothing?”

“You’ll make yourself bad again, if you worry like that,” said the
nurse.

“I wish to God I could,” said he; “and that would be the end of it all.”

In a large ward of a London hospital, nurses have not much time to
devote to the sick fancies of patients. More than enough for them were
their physical needs. The crumb of kindly commonplace was all that the
nurse could give to the man’s hungering soul. He passed the day, staring
up at the mile-high ceiling, incurious as to what vista of misery lay
beyond the still remaining American-cloth covered screen.

From the shaft of fierce sunshine on the wall to his right, he gathered
that spring had passed into early summer. The outside world was a-riot
in the new life of wild flowers and trees and birds and human hopes and
loves. Outside that prison of his—a whitewashed wall, a screen, a
window behind his head reaching sky-high—spread this world with whose
pulsations his heart had ever throbbed in unison. God! How he had loved
it! Every leaf, every crested wave, every patch of sand, every stretch
of heat, every rusty horse grazing on a common, every child before a
cottage door, every vibrating sound or sight of great cities, every
waste in regions of grand desolation, every man with sinews or with
purpose in his eyes, every woman parading the mystery of her sex, from
the tow-haired, dirt-encrusted goose-girl of a Russian village to the
wonder of ever inscrutable wonders that was Olivia.

In all his dreams he inevitably came back to Olivia. Indeed she was the
centripetal force of his longings. All that earth held of the rustle of
leaves and the murmur of waters, the magic of dawn and the roar of town
multitudes and the laughter of green forests and the silence of frozen
steppes, were incorporated in the woman of his adoration. Through her
spoke the voices of the infinite universe. And all that was visible of
it, the patch of sunlight on the whitewashed wall, said:

“She lives and I, a reflected glory of her, live too; but even if you go
hence I shall only appear mockingly before you, on prison walls, until
you are dead. And you will never find me on the blue seas or the joyous
roads or the stone-bounded, clattering haunts of mankind, other than a
meaningless mirage, because the inspired meaning of it all which is
Olivia, has passed from you for evermore.”

“Damn you,” said he, and turned away his head, for he could not turn his
plaster of Paris encased body, and shut out the white line from his
burning eyes.

The next morning Myra came. He had been prepared for her visit. She sat
on the cane-bottomed chair by his bedside. As soon as the nurse left
them together:

“I’m glad you are better, Sir,” she said.

“Have you brought me any message from Mrs. Triona?” he asked.

She looked at him steadily. “You don’t suppose Mrs. Triona knows you are
here?”

It was some time before he could appreciate the meaning of her words.

“She thinks I’m in Poland?”

“She doesn’t know you are here,” said Myra truthfully. “She doesn’t know
where you are.”

“Or care?”

“Or care,” said Myra, and her tone was flat like that of a Fate.

For a while he was silent, accepting the finality of Myra’s words.

“You’ve left her in ignorance of my accident?”

“Yes,” said Myra. “Haven’t you done the same since you’ve recovered your
wits?”

Her dry logic was unanswerable. Yet a man does not expect logic from an
elderly waiting-woman. He passed a hand over his eyes and held it there
for a long time, while Myra sat patient and unemotional. He understood
nothing of her motives. For the moment he did not seek to understand
them. One fact alone mattered. Olivia did not know. She had not, with
horrible contempt, left him to die like a dog. By the thought of such a
possibility he had wronged her. She might, with every reason, desire
never to set eyes on him again—but of active cruelty he should have
known her incapable.

Presently he withdrew his hand and turned to Myra. “My head’s not
altogether right yet,” he said half-apologetically.

“I can quite believe it,” said Myra.

“Why you should bother with me, I don’t understand,” he said.

“Neither do I,” she replied in her disconcerting way. “If you had died I
shouldn’t have been sorry. For her sake. Now you’re not going to die,
I’m glad. For yours.”

“Thank you,” said he with a note of irony. And then after a pause:

“How is your mistress?”

“She is quite well, sir.”

“And happy?”

“Begging your pardon, sir,” said Myra stiffly, “but I’ve not come here
to be asked questions. I’ve no intention of your using me as a
go-between.”

“It never entered my head,” he declared.

“It might,” said Myra. “So I give you warning. Whatever go-between-ing I
do will be to keep you apart from Mrs. Triona.”

“Then why are you worrying about me?” he asked.

“Because I’ve found you in affliction and I’m a Christian woman.”

Neither of them understood the other. He said suddenly with a flash of
the old fire:

“Will you swear you’ll never tell your mistress where I am?”

A faint light flickered in her pale eyes. “I’ll swear if you like. But
haven’t you taken in what I’ve been telling you all the time?”

“So long as we can trust each other—that is all that matters.”

“You can trust me all right,” said Myra.

They talked the ground over again for a while longer. Then he grew tired
with the strain, and the nurse put an end to the interview. But Myra
came the next day and the day after that, and Triona grew to long for
her visit. He became aware of a crabbed kindness in her attitude towards
him side by side with her jealous love for Olivia. She was anxious for
his welfare within grimly prescribed limitations. His immediate future
concerned her. What did he purpose to do with his invalid-dom after his
discharge from the hospital? He himself, at this stage, had no notion.
He confided to her the despair of his active life. The motor-lorry had
wrecked his hopes of salvation. He told her the whole Boronowski story.
Myra nodded; but faithful to the part she had chosen, she said nothing
of Boronowski’s letter to Major Olifant. Only by keeping the lives of
the ill-fated pair in tightly sealed and non-communicable compartments,
could she be true to an ethical code formulated by many definite sorrows
and many vague, but none the less poignant, spiritual conflicts.

“It’s funny,” said he, “that you’re the only human being I should know
in the world.”

Her intuition skipped the gap of demonstration of so extraordinary a
pronouncement, and followed his flight into the Unknown.

“It might be luck for you,” she said.

He smiled wistfully on her.

“Why?”

He hung on her answer which she took some time to give. In the lines on
the pallid face, in the dull blue eyes of this sphinx-like woman so
correct in her negative attire of black coat and skirt and black hat
with just a redeeming touch of white, and on the thin, compressed lips,
his sick man’s brain seemed to read his destiny. She hovered over him,
impressive, baffling, ever about-to-be oracular. Combined with her
mystery existed the strange fact that she was his sole link with the
world, not only the great humming universe of thought and action, but
the inner spiritual world in which Olivia reigned. He regarded her with
superstitious dread and reverence; conscious all the time of the comedy
of so regarding the woman whose duty had been to fold up his trousers
and set out his underclothes on the hot rail of the bathroom.

“What are you going to do when you leave?” she asked, and he guessed a
purpose behind her question.

“I must hide until I am strong enough to take up active life again.”

“Where will you hide?”

He didn’t know. He had not thought—so remote did the date of his
discharge appear. It must be some secluded, man-forgotten spot.

“If the worst comes to the worst and you need a place where you’ll be
looked after, I’ll give you an address of friends of mine,” said Myra.
“You’ll, maybe, spend the rest of your life on crutches, and have all
sorts of things wrong inside you. I shouldn’t like you to feel I was
abandoning you. If you were broken down and needed help, I suppose you
wouldn’t write to me, would you?”

“I most certainly shouldn’t,” said Triona.

“I thought so,” said Myra. “In that case I’d better give you the
address.” She scribbled it on the writing pad by his bedside. “There.
Take it or leave it. It’s the best I can do.”

She left him with an abrupt “Good day, sir,” and took the next train
back to Medlow.

“You haven’t had a long holiday, Myra,” Olivia remarked when she
arrived.

“I didn’t say I was going on a holiday.”

“I hope things were all right.”

“As right as they ever can be,” replied Myra.

The weary weeks of convalescence dragged themselves out. Myra did not
come again; and of course he had no other visitor. He made casual
acquaintances in the ward; here and there an ex-soldier with whom he
could exchange reminiscences of warfare.

Once a discharged sailor in the next bed—the screen had long since been
removed—recovering from an operation, spoke to him of mine-sweeping
days, and perils of storm and submarine and he grew to regard him as a
brother. Both regretted the deluging waters of the North Sea. The sailor
in these times of peace drove a dust cart for the St. Pancras Borough
Council. The wages were good—but what a life for a sea-faring man! He
would have stuck to his old job were it not that a wave had washed him
down on the slithery deck and had brought his knee-cap up against a
stanchion and had stiffened it out so that his career on board-ship was
over. But those were good times, weren’t they? Oh yes. Of course they
groused. But they only groused when they had time. Mostly they hadn’t.
Dust-collecting was an open-air life, true enough; but there was a
difference between the smell of brine and the stench of house refuse. It
was in summer that it made him sick. The odours of the fo’c’sle were not
those of a hairdresser’s shop—nothing smelt so fine, he declared, as a
hairdresser’s shop—they were a bit thick, but a man could go on deck
and fill his lungs with good salt air. And the grub! What an appetite!
He conjured up gargantuan meals in perilous tempests. Nothing of the
sort now. Everything he ate tasted of sour potato peelings.

“That’s the taste of everything in these post-war days,” said Triona,
“everything in life—sour potato peelings.”

The dustman reckoned he was right. In those old days of mine-sweeping, a
man had no anxieties. He had no responsibilities. He was happy as the
day was long. Now he was married and already had a couple of kids. Life
was just one wearisome worry, a continuous accumulation on the debit
side of the slate, with few advantages on the credit side to balance. If
it wasn’t the wife it was the boy; if it wasn’t the boy, it was the
baby; and if it wasn’t them, it was his appendix which had just been
removed. Whoever heard of a sailor-man aboard ship getting appendicitis?
No, all them things, said he, were blessings of peace. Besides, how was
he going to feed his family when they grew older? And clothes, boots,
schooling? And he himself—limited to beer—and such beer! He hadn’t
tasted a drop of rum——. Was there anything like it? Sometimes he saw
it and smelt it in his dreams, but he always woke up before he could put
his lips to the pannikin. If only one could get something to hold on to
in dreams. He never had need to dream of rum in the navy. So much for
peace. Give him the good old war again.

And when his wife, a thin lipped, scraggy blonde, with a moth-eaten fur
stole round her neck (although it was sweltering summer), and a pallid
baby in her arms came to visit him, and spoke querulously of domestic
affairs, Triona gave him his unreserved sympathy.

“And it ain’t,” said the ex-mariner, “as if I couldn’t carry on straight
and proper in civil life. I wonder how many of my mates are getting what
I’m getting. She ought to be proud of me, she ought. Instead of
that—you heard what she said?”

Triona had heard. She had upbraided him for his ungenteel occupation,
considering herself, the daughter (so Triona learned) of a small
sweet-stuff monger in Dover, where they had met during his sea-going
days, socially degraded by her marriage with a municipal collector of
dust. She had married him, by the by, before his present appointment,
while he was drawing out-of-work pay. Apparently he was possessed of
some low-comedy histrionic talent, and she was convinced that he could
make his fortune as a cinema star.

“You married?” he asked.

“Not now,” said Triona.

“You’ve been through it,” said the misogynist. “Women! There never was a
woman who knew when she was well off! Oh, Gawd! Give me the old days on
the _Barracouta_, where there wasn’t any thought of women. That was my
last ship. I had nine months in her. There was _Barracouta_, _Annie
Sandys_, _Seahorse_. . . .”

He ran through the names of his squadron, forgetful, in the sudden flush
of reminiscence, of domestic cares.

“And what did you say you were in?”

“_Vestris._”

“Of course. I remember. Torpedoed. But even that was better than this?”

Triona agreed, and the eternal talk of the sea went on, until the
nostalgia for the wide, free spaces of the world gripped his vitals with
the pains of hunger.

“What are you going to do when you come out?” asked the dustman.

“About the same as you,” replied Triona. “What’s the good of a man with
a game leg?”

The dustman sighed. “You’ve got education,” said he.

At first, aware of accent and manner of expression, the dustman had
taken him for an ex-officer. Only the discharge-papers of John Briggs,
able-seaman, convinced him of John Briggs lowly estate. Still, in the
_Barracouta_ they had an elderly stoker who had been at Cambridge
College. Such a man might be his neighbour.

“I ran away to sea when I was a boy,” said Triona.

So had the dustman. He waxed more confidential. His name was Josh
Bunnings, and he had sailed in every conceivable kind of craft from
Alaska to Singapore. But he had found no time for education. How did his
neighbour acquire it? Books? He shook his head. He had been cured of
books on his first voyage, when the second mate catching him reading a
tattered manual on gardening, when he ought to have been washing up in
the galley, had kicked and cuffed him round the deck. Triona’s mind went
back to his boyhood—to an almost identical incident. There was much in
common between himself and Josh Bunnings. They had started on even
terms. They had met on even terms in the foul fo’c’sles on the North
Sea. They were on even terms, now, lying side by side, lamed, their life
of free adventure a thing of the past. Each dreaded the future; Josh
Bunnings condemned to cart refuse beneath the affected nose of a shrew
of a wife for the remainder of his days; he, Triona, to deal with such
refuse as the world would leave him, but away from the wife who abhorred
him and all his works. On the other hand, between him and Josh Bunnings
lay a great gulf. He had made himself a man of wide culture. Josh
Bunnings had remained abysmally ignorant. But Josh Bunnings had lived
his life an honourable man. If he told his story to Josh Bunnings he
would be condemned by him, even as he had been condemned by his sister
on the morning of his mother’s funeral. So, when the dustman, with
another sigh, harked back to his former idea and said:

“If only I had education.”

“You’re a damned sight better man than I am, without it,” Triona replied
bitterly.

When the three weeks’ comradeship came to an end, on the discharge of
Josh Bunnings, he found himself lost again in a friendless world. The
neighbouring familiar bed was occupied by an ancient man in the throes
of some ghastly malady, and around him was stretched the horrible,
death-suggesting screen. And behind the screen, a week later, the old
man died. It was to relieve the nervous tension of this week that he
began a correspondence with Josh Bunnings. The writing man’s instinct
awoke—the mania of self-expression. His letters to the dustman, full of
the atmosphere of the ward, vivid with lightning sketches of
house-surgeons, sisters, nurses and patients, with here and there
excursions into contrasting tempests, storms of battle, and everywhere
touched with the magic of his queer genius, would, if sent to his
literary agents, have gained him a year’s subsistence.

Josh Bunnings visited him occasionally, when freed from municipal, and
escaped from domestic, obligations. The visits, he explained, were in
return for the letters; for being no scholar, he could not reply. Then
one day he appeared and sat on the chair by Triona’s bed, with the air
of a man about to bring glad tidings. He was rather a heavy, pallid,
clean-shaven man, with a curl of black hair sweeping down to his
eyebrows. His small dark eyes gleamed. At once he disemburdened his
honest soul. He was a Church of England man; always held with
church-going—so did his wife; it was the great bond of union between
them. So he was on friendly terms with the curate of St. Simon’s. And
being on friendly terms with the curate, he had shewn him the letters.

“And, would you believe it, mate?” said he. “Would you believe it? He
wants to put them in print in the Parish Magazine. In print! Fancy!”

He slapped his thigh. Triona stared at him for a moment and then laughed
out loud for the first time for many weeks.

“What are you laughing at?” asked the astonished Bunnings.

“It seems so funny,” said Triona.

“That’s what I thought.”

“And a great honour,” said Triona recovering.

“Of course. Only he said he couldn’t print ’em without your permission.”

Triona gave permission, stipulating, however, that his name should not
be used. His modesty forbade it he explained. Josh Bunnings went away
delighted. In the course of a few posts came a grateful letter from the
curate. In Mr. Briggs’s writing he saw signs of considerable literary
talent which he hoped Mr. Briggs would cultivate. If he could be of help
in this way, he put his services at Mr. Briggs’s disposal. Triona again
laughed, with grim amusement, at a funny, ironical world.

Then, suddenly, the underlying tragedy of this comic interlude smote him
breathless. Alexis Triona was dead and so were his writings, for
evermore. But the impulse to write stirred within him so vehemently that
even in these idle letters to Josh Bunnings he had put all his vividness
of literary expression. The curate’s dim recognition of the unusual was
a sign and a token. Whatever he wrote would be stamped with his
individuality and if published, even anonymously, would lead to his
identification. The arresting quality of his style had been a main
factor in his success. This flashing pictorial way of his he could not
change. If he strove self-consciously to write sober prose, he would
produce dull, uninspired stuff that no man could read; if he lost
self-consciousness, automatically he would betray himself. He would
re-appear in the Olivia-dominated world. Every book or article would
dance before her eyes like an _ignis fatuus_, reminding her maddeningly
of his existence in her propinquity.

An _ignis fatuus_. At this point of his reflection he remembered his
first talk with her, wherein he had counselled her never to lose faith
in her Will-o’-the-Wisp, but to compel it to be her guiding star. More
ironical laughter from the high gods! And yet, why not? He wrestled with
the temptation. As he lay, convalescent on his back, his brain clear,
the sap of youth working in his veins, the uncontrolled fancies of the
imaginative writer wove themselves into shreds of fine romance and
tapestries of exquisite scenes. Just a little concentration, impossible
in the open hospital ward, and all these would blend together into a
thing of immortal beauty. He would find a publisher. Nothing easier. No
name would appear. Or else, perhaps, as a handle for convenience sake,
he would sign the book “Incognito.” It would stir the hearts of men, and
they would say: “There is but one man living who could do this and that
is Alexis Triona.” And Olivia, reading it, and beholding him in it,
would find her heart stirred with the rest, yet far far more deeply than
the rest, and would seek him out, obeying his far-off counsel, and
believe that, in his essential self and in his infinite love, he was
verily her guiding-star.

But when the hour of exaltation had passed and given way to the dreary
commonplace, when the nurse came to wash him like a child, or to chatter
pleasantly of the outside world, the revue which she had seen on her
free afternoon, or the sentimental novel which had beguiled her scanty
leisure, he knew that he had been living in a land of dreams. His real
achievement Olivia knew, and by it she was unmoved. Myra had held out to
him no chance of hope; only certainty of despair. By no further
achievement could Olivia be persuaded. She realized her Will-o’-the-Wisp
as what it really was, a miasmatic gas leading her into quagmires. She
would bitterly resent his reappearance. It would be another trick,
another way of flaunting before her under false pretences. As well write
to her now that he was a mangled wreck in University College Hospital.

In the course of time he was able to leave his bed and be wheeled about
the ward and afterwards to hobble about on a crutch. But the injured leg
was just a bit shorter than the other, so that he was condemned to a
perpetual limp; and though the ribs were mended, yet their breakage had
occasioned internal lesions which would have to be watched for the rest
of his life. No more adventures in wide spaces. No more tramps to John
o’ Groats.

“But I’m a born wanderer,” he cried to the surgeon who made the final
pronouncement. “What shall I do when the wander fever is on me?”

“Fill yourself up with bromide and stick leeches on your head.”

He laughed into the smiling kindly face, and was silent for a moment.

“I can drive a car, I suppose?” he said after a while.

“Safer to drive a horse. You haven’t to crank it up.”

“So I’m going out, a hopeless crock.”

“Oh no. There’s no reason why you shouldn’t live, with reasonable care,
to ninety. You’re fit for light work. Why not office work? An educated
chap like you——By the way, you were off to Poland, if I remember
rightly, when you met with your accident. What’s your trade or
profession?”

“Before the war, I was a cosmopolitan chauffeur,” said Triona.

“And since?”

“The damnedest fool God ever made.”

The surgeon asked him no more questions.


                             CHAPTER XXIII

FANSTEAD is a little country town built on the plan of a sparsely
equipped herring bone. There is the central High Street, a jumble of old
half-timbered houses and staring modern red-brick buildings, and
sprouted from it a series of lateral roads, lanes and alleys, dwindling
in importance to the High Street tip, and each petering out into the
sweet country vagueness of hedges and fields. All save two. One of these
ends abruptly at an inconveniently distant railway station. The other,
villa bordered, meanders pleasantly for a mile or so to the tiny village
of Pendish where it meets at right angles the great high road, and stops
modestly, confronted all of a sudden with rolling open country, swelling
downs patched with meadow and corn-field and crowned with great clumps
of woodland.

Pendish was too small even to have a church. There was a tiny chapel for
the convenience of Baptists. But Anglicans tramped into Fanstead or to
the larger village of Banton-on-the-Hill, another mile along the great
high road. It had a tumbled-down inn, the “Whip and Collar,” and a
straggling row of thatched cottages, and a tiny red-brick villa labelled
as the home of the County Police. But it also had a post-office, which
was also a shop; and this was a small, square two-storied Georgian house
imposing among its thatched neighbours and maintaining itself with a
curious air of dignity, in spite of the front door open to the public
during business hours, and the miscellaneous assortment of sweets,
tobacco, tapes and picture postcards exposed in what was once the
dining-room window.

It was the freehold of Mrs. Pettiland, a widow of fifty; she had
inherited it from her father, a Norfolk thatcher who had brought his
mystery to the west and practising it with skill and saving a little
fortune brought to him by his wife, had amassed enough to buy the square
stone house where he had ended his days. They said in the village that
he had never recovered from the shock occasioned by the fate of his son,
his apprentice and later his partner, who had gone raving mad a week or
two after his marriage and had to be confined in the County Asylum.

Well, the old man had slept with his fathers for many years; his wife
had joined him; the son still lingered on in the madhouse; and Mrs.
Pettiland, very much alone in the world, save for her husband’s
relatives in Fanstead, sold stamps and sweets to the village, and as a
very great favour let the best bedroom to an occasional painter with
unimpeachable introductions.

She was dark-haired, fresh-coloured, and buxom; she dressed with
neatness, wearing old-fashioned stays that gave her a waist and a high
bust; and she was the most considerable personage in Pendish.

When she had received a letter from her sister-in-law, Myra Stebbings,
asking her as a favour to put up a foolish young man named Briggs who
had got himself run over by a motor-lorry, if ever he should act on her
suggestion and come to Pendish, she considered it less as an
introduction than as a command. Whether she loved Myra or not, she did
not know. But she had an immense respect for the dry, grey-faced woman
who had come every year to stay with her, so that she could visit the
brother whom she had loved, in the house of awfulness, five or six miles
away. She stood somewhat in awe of Myra. Her own good man had died
comfortably in his bed and had gone for ever, after a couple of years of
placid content. It was sad; but it was the common lot. The Lord giveth
and the Lord taketh away. But at the idea of a woman’s husband being
shut off from the world in the living tomb of the County Asylum, she
shuddered. Myra always conveyed to her the vague impression, so
impossible to be formulated by an uneducated woman ignorant of
traditional reference, of a human soul defying the tragedy of existence.

So when this Mr. Briggs wrote from the hospital in London, she sent him
a cordial answer. Any friend of Myra Stebbings was more than welcome.
She would not charge him more than out-of-pocket expenses. For she did
not know who this foolish young man might be. Myra sphinx-like, as
usual, had given no clue. But for Myra to ask a favour was an
unprecedented occurrence. She must have far more than ordinary interest
in the welfare of the young fellow. Mrs. Pettiland’s curiosity was
aroused and she awaited the arrival of her new lodger with impatience.

The station car from the Fanstead garage brought him, on a late summer
afternoon, with his brown canvas kit-bag and suit-case and khaki
overcoat. She stood in the pedimented doorway, over which was fixed the
wooden post-office board, and watched him descend. He faced her for a
moment, and raised his hat.

“Mrs. Pettiland?”

She looked at his clear cut face, so boyish in spite of whiteness and
haggardness, at his careless brown hair sweeping over his temples, at
the lips parted in a smile, at the lithe young figure. She caught the
significance of his uplifted hat and the pleasant tone of his voice. In
her limited category of values he would be only one thing—a gentleman.
The manners of an instant charmed her.

“Mr. Briggs?”

“I hope I shan’t be a dreadful nuisance to you, but I need rest and
quiet and Miss Stebbings told me to come. And,” he smiled, “What she
says generally goes.”

“I see that you know her, sir,” said Mrs. Pettiland pleasantly.

The luggage taken in, the cab dismissed she led him up to his room—a
large bed-sitting room, looking over a wild garden and a wide expanse of
rolling downs, with the faint white ribbon of high road circling in and
out and round about them. His meals, she informed him, he could take in
the parlour downstairs, without extra charge.

“But I insist on paying my way,” he said. “Unless my staying here is
profitable to you, I can’t remain. For the present at least, I can well
afford it.”

So a modest arrangement was made and Triona settled down in his new
home.

For some days he enjoyed the peace of Pendish. He had brought with him
books, ordered from the hospital; books which would take him long to
read; some of the interminable modern French novels; a complete Fielding
and Smollett; _Paradise Lost_ and _The Faerie Queene_, neither of which
he had as yet had time to go through. He spent hours in the sunny garden
riotous with ingenous roses and delphinium and Canterbury bells and
burning red-hot pokers as they call them in the West. Often he limped
along the green lanes that wound between the fields up and down the
downs. Becoming aware that he knew nothing of bird-life, he procured
through the Fanstead bookshop popular works on British Birds, and
sitting under a tree in a corner of a meadow would strive to identify
them by their song and plumage and queer individual habits. He talked to
the villagers. He talked to Mrs. Pettiland, who told him the tragic
story of Myra and the man in the County Asylum. Of Myra’s doings all the
year round, he found she knew little. She was with her lady whom she had
served most of her life and had gone back with her to Medlow. Of the
lady herself Myra never spoke. Mrs. Pettiland did not know whether the
lady was married or not. That was Myra Stebbings’s way. She gave no
information and no one dared ask her questions.

“She never even told me, in her letter, who you were, sir,” she added.

“I am just under her protection,” he smiled. “She took me up when I had
no one to defend me.”

“She’s a curious woman,” sighed Mrs. Pettiland.

“With strange tastes in protégés.” He laughed. “To tell you the truth,
Mrs. Pettiland, I don’t quite know myself what I am. But doubtless
sooner or later I’ll do something to astonish you.”

The yearning to do this fretted his secret heart. To move about the
summer fields when the weather was fine, to lounge in an easy-chair over
books in seasons of rain, was all very well for the period of
convalescence after the confinement in the hospital ward. But after a
while, when his muscles regained strength and the new blood coursing
through his veins brought colour to his cheeks, he began to feel the old
imperious need of movement and of action. Sometimes he went back, as in
his talks with the dustman, to the idyllic tempests in the North Sea;
sometimes to the fierce freedom of the speed across the illimitable
steppes of Russia; sometimes to his perilous escape to Petrograd;
sometimes to his tramps along the safe roads of England; to his
wanderings through the dangerous by-ways of the East End. Bitterly he
cursed the motor-lorry that had knocked him out of his Polish adventure.
Except on Olivia he had never so set his heart on a thing before. Well,
he shrugged angry shoulders. It was no use thinking of that. Poland had
gone, like Olivia, out of his life. And when he came to think of it, so
had everything that had made up all that he had known or conceived of
life.

                 *        *        *        *        *

He closed _Tom Jones_, and stared out of the window on the rain-drenched
hills; Tom Jones, with his physical lustiness, his strong animal
bravura, was more than he could bear. Tom Jones, no matter in what
circumstance he was placed, had all the world before him. His gay
confidence offended the lost man. For he was lost. Not a lost soul, he
told himself; that was taking an absurd Byronical view of the matter. To
pose as a modern Manfred would be contemptible. He went down to bed-rock
of commonplace. He was a lost man—a fact which was quite serious enough
for any human being to contemplate with dismay. Lost, tied by a lame leg
in a deadly little backwater of the world, where he must remain till he
died. He could write, pour out all the fever of his soul into words. But
what was the good, if no word of his could be transmitted from this
backwater into the haunts of men? Work without hope—a verse of
Coleridge came vaguely to him—was like draining nectar through a sieve.
It could only end in heart-break. He stared through the dripping
window-pane at the free hills, dim and hopeless in the mist of deluge.
Nothingness confronted him.

He wondered whether Myra, with diabolical insight and deliberate malice,
had not lured him hither, so that she could hold him in relentless grip.
At any rate she had cast him into this prison.

He lay awake all that night. The next morning the sky had cleared and
the sun shone down on the gratefully steaming land of green. He
breakfasted in the tiny parlour opposite the shop-post-office on the
ground floor. The ornaments in it were those of long ago. Prints of the
landing of the Guards after the Crimea, of Queen Victoria and the Prince
Consort. Curiously carved and polished coconut shells, and a great egg
on which a staring mermaid was nudely painted stood on the mantelpiece.
On the chiffonier were calabashes, with gaudy figures of indigenous
Indians, such as came from the West Indies seventy years ago, and a
model of a full-rigged ship under a glass case, and a moulting stuffed
toucan, with its great beak and yellow and red plumage. The late Mr.
Pettiland’s father, he had learned, had followed the sea. So, beside the
objects on the crowded mantelpiece and in front of palm-leaf fans were
sprigs of white coral and strings of strange beads, and a dumpy,
shapeless, wooden Polynesian god. And at the end lay a great conch shell
with its wide, pink, curving lips, mysterious and alluring.

He could scarcely eat. The night had shaken him. He gulped down some
food and coffee, lit a pipe and wandered restlessly about the room,
looking at these tokens of the lands far away which he had never seen.
The coral fascinated him. In the hospital he had read _Typee_ and
_Oomoo_ of Herman Melville in Dent’s cheap collection of classics. The
sight of the coral quickened dormant longings. He took the great
conch-shell in his hand wondering at its beauty of curve and colour. And
as he did so his mind went back to early childhood—to an old aunt whom
he occasionally was taken to visit in torturing Sunday clothes
sacrosanct from the defilement of jam under dreadful penalties, and who
possessed such a shell. He remembered that the shell was the glory that
compensated the frigid horror of that house. He would hold it to his ear
and listen to the boom of far-off surfs and then go home and mingle the
message with the pointing finger of Salvation Yeo. And now, grown man,
inured to adventure, he put the shell to his ear, and the message was
the same, vibrating the call of oceans thundering on distant beaches
through the fibres of his being.

He went out into the garden and stood in the sun and looked almost
unseeingly at the rolling downs. Suddenly he became aware of the ribbon
of road that lost itself not far away, behind a bluff. It was the Great
High Road that led eventually to a great western port, where great ships
sailed to the South Seas. The Power seemed to impel him, as it had
impelled him as a boy to run away from home. By following that road, he
would reach the port. At the port he could ship before the mast. On
board his limp would not matter. For the rest, he was strong, as strong
as a lion, in spite of all pronouncements by the doctors. It was the one
adventure life left open to him. Nay more, the one chance of maintaining
his reason. He stood with hands clenched staring at the road, the sweat
beading on his forehead.

To pack up belongings and arrive with genteel suit-case and kit-bag at
the dock-side and expect to be taken on as an ordinary hand would be the
act of an embecile. He passed his hand mildly through his hair in his
instinctive gesture. Why not go as he was, a cap on his head, and his
money, all he had in the world, in a belt (bought for Poland) round his
waist? It was escape from prison. Escape from Myra. The final
disappearance from the orbit of Olivia.

Perhaps it was the maddest thing he had done in his life. But what did
it matter? If he crocked up, he crocked up. At least he could try. He
went indoors and in the parlour found an old railway timetable. There
were only two trains a day from Fanstead to the main-line junction, and
the morning train had already gone. Why should he not tramp to the
Junction, as in the old days, getting a lift here and there on a cart,
and know again the freedom of the vagabond road?

He went up to his room, put on his belt of money and good thick boots,
and made up a bundle of necessaries. On his dressing-table he left a
letter addressed to Mrs. Pettiland, enclosing a month’s rent. He looked
round the room for the last time, as he had looked round so many in his
life, and laughed. No books on this journey. As he had not left the
Tyneside with books years ago, so would he start now afresh, with the
same equipment. He went downstairs with a light heart, and called out to
Mrs. Pettiland busy in her post-office.

“I’m going off on a jaunt—so don’t expect me till you see me.”

And the answer came: “Don’t overdo yourself with your lame leg.”

He laughed at the idea. His leg could bear his whole weight to-day
without a twinge. Retracing his steps down the passage, he entered the
garden and left the place by the wicket-gate and struck up the winding
lanes and across fields to the high road, his stick and bundle over his
shoulder. By doing so, instead of taking the road at the end of the
village, he could cut off a mile. It was a morning of freshness and
inspiration. A cool breeze sent the clouds scurrying across the sky and
rustled the leaves of the elms and rippled the surface of the half-grown
corn. His spirits rose as he walked, somewhat of a jog-trot walk, it is
true, but that would last for the rest of his life; so long as the pain
had gone for ever, all was well. He reached the high road and settled
down to his tramp, gladdened by the sight of cart and car and cottage
gardens flaming with roses and hollyhocks or restful with screens of
sweet-peas. In the soft-mannered West-country fashion, folks gave him
“good day” as he passed. The road undulated pleasantly, now and then
sweeping round the full bosom of a hill, with a steeply sloping drop of
thirty feet to the valley. Such spots were grimly sign-posted for
motorists; for at one of them, so Mrs. Pettiland had told him, a
motor-lorry during the war had slipped over at night and all the
occupants had been killed. He regarded it with a chauffeur’s eye and
smiled contemptuously at the inefficiency of the driver. He could race
along it at sixty miles an hour. But still, if you did go over—there
was an end of you.

By noon he was hungry and ate cold meat and bread at a wayside inn, and
smoked contentedly afterwards on the bench outside and talked of crops
and licensing laws with the landlord. When he started again he felt
stiff from the unaccustomed exercise. Walking would relax his muscles.
Yet he began to tire. A while later he came upon a furniture removing
van which had broken down. Two men drew their heads from below the
bonnet and looked at each other ruefully, and their speech was profane.
He asked what was wrong. They didn’t know. He threw off his coat, glad
to get to an engine again, and in a quarter of an hour had set it going
merrily. For two or three miles he sat on the tailboard between the two
canvas-aproned packers, enjoying the respite. When they turned off
eventually from the main road, and he had to descend, he felt strangely
disinclined to walk. The Junction was still a long way off. It would
have been better, after all, to wait for the evening train from
Fanstead. He was always starting on crazy ventures without counting the
cost. But he limped on.

The road went through a desolate land of abandoned quarry and ragged
pine woods. The ascent was steep. Suddenly, as though someone had
pierced his leg with hot iron, flamed the unmistakable pain. He stood
aghast at the pronouncement of doom. At that moment, while he hung there
in agony, a rough figure of a man in old khaki slacks rose from a near
hollow in the quarry and, approaching him, asked what time it was.
Triona took out his watch, a gold one, the gift of Olivia. It was four
o’clock. The man thanked him gruffly and returned to his stony Bethel.
Triona hobbled on a few more steps. But the torture was too great. He
must rest. The pine-wood’s cool quiet invited him. He dragged himself
thither wearily, and sat down, his back against the trunk of a tree. He
tried to think. Of course the simplest method of extrication was to hail
any passing car and beg for a lift, either to the Junction or back to
Pendish. Walking was out of the question. But which of those ways should
he take? The weight of physical tiredness overwhelmed him and dulled the
deciding brain. He had set out at nine in the morning and it was now
four o’clock in the afternoon. He had not realized how slow his progress
had been. Yes, he was exhausted and sleepy. Nothing mattered. He rolled
on his side, stuck his arm under his head and fell into a dead sleep.
Thirty yards away, at varying intervals, motor vehicles flashed by.

                 *        *        *        *        *

He was dreaming of a rabbit running across his throat, when suddenly he
awoke to find the rabbit a man’s arm. He gripped it, instinctively. It
was nearly dark.

“What the devil are you doing?”

The man replied: “Why we thought you was dead.”

At the significance of the plural, his grasp relaxed and he sat up,
staring at two men who had come upon him in his solitude. They were
dirty, unshaven, not nice to look upon. On one of them he noticed a pair
of old khaki slacks. As soon as he moved they knelt one on each side of
him.

“And if I’d been dead, you’d have run through my pockets wouldn’t you?”
Suddenly he clapped his hands in front of him. “You swine, you’ve got my
watch and chain.”

He thrust them aside and scrambled anyhow to his feet, and struck
instinctively with his left full in the face of the nearest man who had
sprung up also. But all his weight was then on his left foot and the
flame of agony shot up through his thigh and his leg crumpled up before
the blow reached the man. Then the one in the khaki slacks came in with
an upper cut on the point of his jaw and he fell senseless.

When he recovered consciousness a few minutes afterwards, he found
himself alone, dazed, rather sick, in an uncomprehended world of
gathering darkness. Black clouds had swept over the brow of the quarry
hill. A pattering noise some way off struck his ear. He realized it was
rain on the road. He drew himself up to a sitting posture and in a
moment or two recovered wits and memory. There had been a fight. There
was one man in khaki slacks—why, that was the man who had asked him the
time at four o’clock in the afternoon. He had lain in wait for him and
robbed him of his watch and chain. What a fool he had been to parade it
in this manner. Well, it was gone. It would teach him a lesson in
prudence. But the other man? How did he come in? Why did they wait three
or four hours before attacking him? Perhaps the man of the khaki slacks
had struggled against temptation until a more desperate acquaintance
came along. He remembered the landlord of the inn where he had lunched
telling him of an ugly quarrying village he would pass through, a nest
of out-of-works—owing to quarries, unprofitable at the high rate of
wages, being closed down—living discontented Bolshevik lives on high
out-of-work pay. He cursed his leg. If it had not failed him, he would
have got home on the first man, as easily as shaking hands—the flabby,
unguarded face shimmered in front of him; and then he could have turned
his attention to the man in khaki slacks, a true loafer type, spiritless
when alone—the kind of man, who, if he had worn those slacks in the
army, would have been in guard-room every week, and would have cowered
as a perpetual cleaner of latrines under the eyes of vitriol-tongued
sergeants. Far from a fighting man. His imagination worked, almost
pleasurably, in the reconstitution of the robbery. But for his
abominable leg he would have downed both the degenerate scoundrels, and
have recovered his precious belongings. He damned them and his leg
impartially. The watch and chain were all that he had kept materially of
Olivia. In the morning he had hesitated as to the advisability of
carrying them with him, gold watches and chains not being customarily
accoutrements of a common sailor in wind-jammer or tramp steamer
fo’c’sle. But sentiment had prevailed. He could hide them somewhere,
when he reached the port, and at convenient slop-shops he could have
reorganized attire and equipment.

The rain pattering on the open road came dribbling through the branches
of the pines. He cursed the rain. He must go on somewhere. Absurd to
stay in the wood and get wet through. He struggled to his feet and then
for the first time became aware of a looseness around his middle. He
looked down. His trousers were unbuttoned, his shirt sagged out
immodestly as if the front had been hurriedly tucked in. His hands
sought his waist. The belt with all the money he had in the world had
gone.


                              CHAPTER XXIV

IT was close on midnight when a car grated and stopped in front of the
little Georgian house in Pendish, and the truant stumbled through the
door, left open, into the presence of Mrs. Pettiland who was anxiously
awaiting him. He was wet through, dishevelled, exhausted. He was
shivering with cold and his face was like the mask of a ghost. She met
him in the passage and dragged him into the little sea-haunted parlour.

“Oh, what have you been doing?”

She had been worried all day, unable to account for the money, a month’s
rent and board in advance, in the envelope addressed to her.

“Didn’t I tell you not to overdo yourself?”

He greeted her upbraidings with a laugh of bravado.

“I set out to-day on my last adventure. This is the end of it. I’m here
for the rest of time.”

“You’ll be in the churchyard for the rest of eternity, if you don’t go
to bed at once,” she declared.

She packed him to his room; fussed motherwise about him; dosed him with
ammoniated quinine; stuck hot-water bottles in his bed; stood over him
with hot Bovril with an egg in it. She prescribed whisky, also hot; but
since the fatal night at Rowington’s dinner party, he had abjured
alcohol.

“Now perhaps you’ll tell me what has happened,” she said.

“My game leg gave out when I got to some quarries. I believe the beastly
place is called Woorow——”

“Woorow! Why that’s the other side of the county!” She looked at him
aghast. “Do you mean to say that you walked to Woorow in your state?
Really men oughtn’t to be allowed to run about loose.”

“I’ve run about loose since I was fourteen,” said he.

“And a pretty mess you seem to have made of it. And then what did you
do?”

She took away the cup of Bovril and poached egg which he had devoured
ravenously, to her womanly satisfaction, and handed him another. He
continued his story, recounting it, between spoonfulls, in his
imaginative way. When he found he could go no further he curled up to
sleep in a wood. When things went wrong, he assured her, there was
nothing like going to sleep in a wood. All the pixies and elves and
rabbits and stoats and weasels came and sat round you in a magic circle,
shielding you from harm. What would have happened to the Babes in the
Wood, he cried, if it hadn’t been for the robins?

“I wonder what your temperature is,” said Mrs. Pettiland.

“Normal,” said he. “This is the first hour I’ve been normal for months.”

“I’ll take it before I leave you,” she said. “Well, you went to sleep?”

Yes. He slept like an enchanted dog. He woke up four hours afterwards to
find it pouring with rain. What could he do? He had to get back.
Walking, with his rotten old leg, was out of the question. In the
daytime a decent looking pedestrian may have the chance of stopping a
motoring Good Samaritan and, with a tale of sudden lameness, get a lift
by the side of the chauffeur. But at night it was impossible. To stand
with arresting arms outspread in front of the hell-lamps of an advancing
car would be an act of suicidal desperation. No; he had returned by all
sorts of stages. He had almost forgotten them. A manure cart had brought
him some way. Then he had gone dot and carry one for a mile. Then
something else. He could only hail slow moving traffic in the wet and
darkness. Then he spent an endless time in the cab of a steam traction
engine which he had abandoned on seeing a two-seater car with flaring
head-lamps, stationed at a cottage gate.

“The old campaigner’s instinct, Mrs. Pettiland. What should it be but a
doctor’s car, outside a poor little cottage? And as the head-lamps were
pointing to where I had come from, I concluded he had drawn up and would
turn round and go where I wanted to get to.”

“And was it a doctor?”

He laughed. Of course it was. He had taken shelter from the rain under
the hood of the car for an hour. Then, when the cottage door opened, he
had scrambled out and waited for the owner. There had been a few words
of explanation. By luck, it was Doctor Stansfield of Fanstead——

“Dr. Stansfield—why——”

“Why of course. He knows you inside and out. A charming fellow. He
dropped me here, or rather I dropped him.”

“And he never came in to look after you—a man in your condition? I’ll
give him a piece of my mind when I see him.”

He soothed the indignant lady. The good doctor was unaware that anything
particular was wrong with him. Poor man, he had been on the go since
five o’clock the previous morning—human beings are born inconsiderate
of the feelings of others—and he was dog-tired. Too dog-tired even to
argue. He would have given a lift to Judas Iscariot, or the Leper of
Aosta, so long as he wasn’t worried.

“He nearly pitched us over, at a curve called Hell’s Corner—you know.
The near front wheel was just an inch off the edge. And then he stopped
dead and flung his hands over his eyes and said: ‘Oh, my God!’ He had
lost his nerve. Then when I told his I had driven everything from a
General’s Rolls Royce to an armoured car all over Russia in the war, he
let me take the wheel. And that’s the whole thing.”

He chatted boyishly, in high spirits, and smoked a cigarette. Mrs.
Pettiland went for a clinical thermometer. To her secret disappointment,
his temperature was only just above normal. She would have loved to keep
him in bed a few days and have the proper ordering of him. A woman loves
to have an amazing fool of a man at her mercy, especially if she is
gifted with a glimmer of humour. When she left him, he laughed out loud.
Well, he had had his adventure with a vengeance. A real old
Will-o’-the-Wisp chase, which had landed him, as ever, into disaster.
Yet it had been worth it, every bit, until his leg gave out on the
quarry hill. Even his slumber he did not regret. His miserable journey
back, recalling old days, had its points. It was good to get the better
of circumstances.

As to his money which was to have started him in life among coral reefs
and conch-shells, that had gone irretrievably. Of course, he could have
gone to the nearest police-station. But if the miscreants were arrested,
he would have to prosecute. Highway robbery was a serious affair; the
stolen belt packed with bank notes, a romantic one. The trial would
provide a good newspaper story. There would be most undesirable
publicity; and publicity is the last thing a man dead to the world would
desire. He shrugged philosophic shoulders. Let the money go. The humour
of the situation tickled his vagabond fancy. He was penniless. That was
the comical end of his pursuit of the _ignis fatuus_. The freak finality
and inevitability of it stimulated his sense of the romantic. If he had
been possessed of real courage, he would have made over all his money,
months ago, to Olivia and disappeared, as he was now, into the unknown.
His experience of life ought to have taught him the inexorable fatality
of compromise. What would he do? He did not know. Drowsy after the day’s
fatigue, and very warm and comfortable, he did not care. He curled
himself up in the bed and went to sleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

One afternoon, a week afterwards, he limped into Mrs. Pettiland’s
post-office with a gay air.

“Mrs. Pettiland,” said he, “at last I have found my true vocation.”

“I’m glad to hear it, sir,” she replied undisturbed in her official
duties which consisted in taking the coppers from a small child in
payment for two stamps. “You’ve been rather restless these last few
days.”

Triona watched the child depart, clasping the stamps in a clammy hand.

“When one hasn’t a penny in the world and starvation stares you in the
face, one may be excused for busy search for a means of livelihood.”

“You’ve got plenty of money.”

“I haven’t.”

“You paid me a month’s board and lodging in advance, the other
day—though why you did it, I can’t understand.”

“I was going to run away,” he said cheerfully. “To compensate you in
that miserable manner for inconvenience was the least I could do. But
the gods rightly stepped in and hauled me back.” He swung himself on the
counter and smiled at her. “I’m a fraud, you know.”

The plump and decorous lady could not realize his earnestness. Behind
his words lay some jest which she could not fathom.

“You don’t believe me?”

He sighed. If he had told her a fairy tale she, like all the rest of the
world in his past life, would have believed him. Now that he told the
truth, he met with blank incredulity.

“I’m going to earn my living. I’m taking on a job as chauffeur.”

She stared at him. “A chauffeur—you?”

“Yes. Why not?”

Her mind ran over his intellectual face, his clothes, his manners, his
talk—free and sometimes disconcertingly allusive, like that of the rare
and impeccably introduced artists whom she had lodged—his books . . .

“Why—you’re a gentleman,” she gasped.

“Oh no. Not really. I’ve been all kinds of things in my time. Among them
I’ve passed as a gentleman. But by trade I’m a chauffeur. I practically
started life as a chauffeur—in Russia. For years I drove a Russian
Prince all over Europe. Now there aren’t any more Russian Princes I’m
going to drive the good people of Fanstead to railway stations and
dinner parties.”

“Well, I never,” said Mrs. Pettiland.

“There’s a young man—an ex-officer—Radnor by name, in Fanstead—who
has just set up a motor garage.” “He’ll fail,” said Mrs. Pettiland.
“They all do. Old Hetherington of ‘The Bull’ has all the custom.”

“With one rickety death-trap for hire and a fool of a mechanic who has
wrecked every car sent in for repairs for a radius of thirty miles. I
offered Hetherington to teach him his business. You might as well sing
‘Il Trovatore’ to a mule. So I went to Radnor. He had just sacked a man,
and with my invariable luck, I stepped in at the right moment. No, Mrs.
Pettiland—” he swung his sound leg and looked at her, enjoying her
mystification “—the reign of Hetherington is over. Radnor’s Garage is
going to be the wonder of the countryside.”

He believed it implicitly. Radnor, a mild and worried young man, with
quite a sound knowledge of his business, might struggle along and earn a
hand-to-mouth living. But he lacked driving-power. To Triona, during his
two or three interviews with him, that was obvious. He had sufficient
capital for a start, a good garage equipment, a fairly modern 25 h.p.
utility car and was trying to make up his mind to buy another. Triona
divined his irresolution. He would be at the mercy of unscrupulous
mechanics and chauffeurs. His spirit seemed to have been broken by two
years imprisonment in Germany. He had lost the secret of command. And,
by nature, a modest, retiring gentleman. Triona pitied him. He had
wandered through the West of England seeking a pitch where the
competition was not too fierce, and finding unprogressive Fanstead, had
invested all his capital in the business. He had been there a couple of
months during which very little work had come in. He could stick it out
for six months more. After that the deluge.

“Give me four pounds a week as head mechanic and chauffeur,” said
Triona, “and the deluge will be golden rain.”

This was after the exhibition of John Briggs’ papers—Armoured Car
Column and Minesweeper—and the tale of his Russian chauffeurdom. He had
also worked magic, having a diagnostician’s second sight into the inside
of a car’s mechanism, with a mysteriously broken down 40 h.p. foreign
car, the only one in the garage for repairs, which, apparently flawless,
owner and chauffeur and Radnor himself regarded with hebetude.

“I’ll take you on all right,” said Radnor. “But, surely a man like you
ought to be running a show of his own.”

“I haven’t a cent in the world,” replied Triona. “So I can’t!”

All this he told Mrs. Pettiland, swinging his sound leg, as he sat on
the counter.

“The only fly in the ointment,” said he, “is that I shall have to move.”

“From here? Whatever for?”

“Chauffeurs don’t have luxurious bed-sitting-rooms with specially
designed scenery for views. They can’t afford it. Besides, they’re not
desirable lodgers.”

She flushed indignantly. If he thought she would prefer his room to his
company, because he drove a car, he was very much mistaken. The
implication hurt. Even suppose he was fit to look after a car, he was
not yet fit to look after himself. Witness his folly of a week ago. He
would pay her whatever he could afford and she would be more than
contented.

“What wonderful people there are in the world,” he sighed.

But he withstood her generous blandishments. No, there was an eternal
fitness of things. Besides, he must live at the garage, ready to attend
telephone calls by day or by night. He couldn’t be hobbling backwards
and forwards between Fanstead and Pendish. Against this practical side
of the question there could be no argument.

“And what shall I do with the money you’ve paid in advance?”

“Keep it for a while,” said he. “Perhaps Randor will give me the sack
and I’ll come creeping back to you.”

Thus did Triona, with bag and baggage take up his quarters in an attic
loft in the garage yard at Fanstead.

Not since his flight from Olivia had he felt so free of care. Fate had
condemned him to the backwater and in the backwater he would pass his
contented life, a life of truth and honesty. And he had before him an
essential to his soul’s health—an ideal. He would inspire the
spiritless with spirit, the ineffectual with efficiency, the sick heart
with health. The man Radnor had deserved well of his country through
gallant service, wounds and imprisonment. His country had given him the
military Cross and a lieutenant’s gratuity, and told him not to worry it
any more. If Mrs. Pettiland’s prophecy came true and he failed, he would
be cast upon a country that wouldn’t be worried. Triona swore that he
should pull through. He would save a fellow-man from shipwreck, without
his knowledge. It was something to live for. He became once more the
perfect chauffeur, the enthusiastic motor-man, dreaming of a great
garage—a sort of Palace of Automobiles for the West of England.

And as he dreamed, so did it begin to come to pass. The efficiency of
the Quantock Garage became known for miles around. Owners of valuable
cars forsook the professional wreckers in the great junction town and
sent them to Fanstead. Radnor soon bought his second car; by the end of
the autumn a third car; and increased his staff. Triona was foreman
mechanician. Had he not so desired, he need not have driven. Nor need he
have driven in the brass-buttoned livery on which he insisted that
Radnor’s chauffeurs should be attired. Smartness, he argued rightly,
caught the eye and imagination. But he loved the wheel. Driving cooled
the vagabond fire in his veins. There was an old touring-car of high
horse-power, excellent when nursed with loving hand and understanding
heart, but a box of dismal caprice to the inexpert, which he would allow
no one to drive but himself. Radnor held the thing in horror and wanted
to sell it as a bad bargain. He had had it out once and it had broken
down ten miles from home and had suffered the ignominy of a tow back.
Triona wrought at it for three weeks, conjuring up spare parts from
nowhere, and fitting to it new devices, and turned out a going concern
in which he took inordinate pride. He whirled touring parties prodigious
distances in this once rickety creature of his adoption. He could get
thirty-five or forty out of her easily.

“All right. It’s your funeral, not mine,” said Radnor during one of
their discussions.

It was a healthy life. His lameness did not matter. Whatever internal
lesions he suffered from gave no symptoms of existence. His face lost
its lines of suffering, his eyes their shifty haggardness. He put on
flesh, as far as is possible for a naturally spare-built man. Randor, an
honourable soul, when the business in the new year shewed proof of
immense development, offered him a substantial increase in salary. But
Triona refused.

“What do I want with money, my dear fellow? If I had more I’d only spend
it for books. And I’ve more of them now than I know where to put them.
No; keep all you can for capital in the business. Or stick it into an
advertisement scheme I’ve been working out—”

“You’re an odd devil, Briggs,” said Radnor. He was a small dark man with
great mournful eyes and a little clipped moustache over a timorous
mouth, and his lips were always twitching. “A queer devil. What I should
have done without you, I don’t know. If I could do what I want, I should
offer you a partnership.”

“Don’t be a damned fool,” said Triona. “A partner puts in money and I
haven’t a bean. Besides if I were a partner, the whole show would go to
hell.”

“Why?”

“I should immediately want to go and do something else,” replied Triona.

“I give it up,” said Radnor.

“Best thing you can do,” said Triona.

How could the very grateful young proprietor divine the spiritual
crankiness of his foreman? He went through the English equivalent of
shoulder shrugging.

Briggs, from the business point of view, was a treasure fallen from
Heaven. And Briggs was a mystery. He didn’t begin to pretend to
understand Briggs. Briggs obviously didn’t want to be understood. Radnor
was a gentleman. He could press the matter no further.

“Let us get this business up to a net profit of three thousand a year
and then we may talk,” said Triona.

“Three thou—! Good God, man, I couldn’t talk. I’d slobber and gibber!”

“That’s where I’ll come in,” laughed Triona.

He had set his heart on this wash-out from the war making good. Just
before Christmas he had an added incentive. A melancholy lady and a
wistful pretty girl had flashed for a week end through Fanstead. They
had come from London and had put up at The King’s Head. Radnor had made
the tour of the proprietor through the garage.

“This is Mr. Briggs, my foreman, whom I’ve so often told you about.”

And afterwards, to Triona, with an air of inconsequence:

“A kind of aunt and cousin of mine who wanted to see how I was getting
on.”

Poor old chap! Of course they wanted to see how he was getting on. The
girl’s assessing eyes took in everything, himself included.

The unbidden phrase flashed through his brain.

“He shall marry the girl by Michaelmas Day!”

The sudden impishness of it delighted him.

“By God, he shall!” he swore to himself.

So he refused an increase of salary and, by following an _ignis fatuus_
of an ideal, he kept his conscience in a state of interested amusement
at the mystification of his employer.

April came and found the Quantock Garage in full tide of business.
Hetherington of “The Bull” had long since given up his wheezy station
car and the motor-destroying works in which he housed it. Triona
laboured from morning to night, for a while content to see the wheels of
an efficient establishment go round. And then he began to grow restless.
He had set Radnor permanently on his feet. If he left, the business
would go on by its own momentum. Nothing more was needed than Radnor’s
own conscientious plodding. Why should he stay? He had achieved his
purpose. Radnor would surely be in a financial position warranting him
to marry the girl by Michaelmas.

“I’ll see him through,” he vowed, and stayed on. “And then——”

And then? Life once more became a blank. Of late he had drugged lonely
and despairing thoughts by reading. Books grew into great piles in
corners of his loft above the garage. But reading awoke him to the
poignant craving for expression. He had half a dozen tantalizing plots
for novels in his head, a score of great situations, a novelist’s
gallery of vivid personalities. As to the latter, he had a superstition.
If he gave one a name it would arise in flesh and blood, insistent on
having its story told. So he shut tempting names resolutely from his
brain; for he had made up his queer mind never to write another line of
romance.

The spring stirred the sap within him. It was a year now since he had
fled from Olivia. What was she doing, what feeling? Occasionally he
called on Mrs. Pettiland.

Myra, he learned, had paid her weekly visit in October, had occupied his
old room, had gone to visit her lunatic husband, had maintained her
impenetrable silence as to her mistress’s doings. When Mrs. Pettiland
had reported his chauffeur activities, Myra had said:

“I’m glad he has got honest employment.”

“Shall I let him know that you’re here?” Mrs. Pettiland had asked.

Myra had answered in her final way:

“I’ve no desire to see him and he certainly has no desire to see me.”

Myra, therefore, had come and gone without his knowledge. Often he
wished that he had met her and wrung some information from her unwilling
lips. And now, with his purpose accomplished, his heart aching for
change, his spirit craving to pour itself out in tumultuous words, and
his soul crying for her that was lost, the thought that had haunted the
back of his mind for the past year stood out grimly spectre-wise. What
right had he to live? Olifant had spoken truly. What right had he to
compel her to perpetual widowhood that was no widowhood? She was tied to
him, a husband lost, as far as she was concerned, to human ken, never to
cross her path again; tied to him as much as Myra was tied to the poor
wretch in the madhouse. And as Myra had grown soured and hard, so might
Olivia grow. Olivia so young now, with all the joy of life before her.
He gone, she could marry again. There was Olifant, that model of men,
whom he guessed to have supplanted. With him she could be happy until
her life’s end. Once more she could be Lady Bountiful of “The Towers.”
. . . The conception was an agony of the flesh, keeping him awake of
nights on the hard little camp-bed in the loft. He grappled with the
torture, resolved to triumph over it, as he had gritted his teeth and
triumphed over physical pain in hospitals. The knife was essential, he
told himself. It was for her sake. It was his duty to put himself out of
the world.

And yet the days went on, and he felt the lust of life in his blood. The
question tauntingly arose: Is it braver to die than to live? Is it more
cowardly to live than to die? He couldn’t answer it.

In the meantime he went on mending broken-down motor-engines and driving
gay tourists about the countryside, in his car of resurrection.


                              CHAPTER XXV

WHAT was bound to happen had happened. Olifant the Galahad, out for
grails, as Triona, and indeed as Olivia had pictured him, had lost his
head, poured out a flow of mad words, and flung his arm about her and
kissed her passionately. She had been caught, had half-surrendered;
released, she had put hands to a tumultuous bosom and staggered away
from him. And there had followed a scene enacted for the
twenty-billionth time on the world’s stage. She had grown weak and
strong by turns. At last she had said: “If you love me, go now and let
me think it over and all that it means.”

And he had gone, passion yielding to his courteous consideration of her,
and she was left alone in the drawing-room, staring through the open
French windows at the May garden.

Since her return from the South of France, she had felt the thing
coming. In October, as soon as Myra had returned from her holiday, fear
had driven her from Medlow. The hunger in the man’s eyes proclaimed an
impossible situation. The guest and host position she had changed after
the first few weeks. Brother and sister and herself kept house
together—on the face of it a sensible and economical arrangement. Mr.
Trivett and Mr. Fenmarch, once more financial advisers, commended it
with enthusiasm. The summer had passed happily enough. The _modus
vivendi_ with the sections of Medlow society respectively symbolized by
Landsdowne House and Blair Park had arranged itself automatically. She
found conferred upon her the Freedom of each. The essential snobbery of
English life is a myth kept alive by our enemies. It is true that the
squire and the linen-draper do not ask each other and their families to
dinner. Their social worlds are apart. They don’t want to ask each other
to dinner. They would never dream of asking each other to dinner, one no
more than the other; they respect each other too mightily. But a dweller
in both worlds, such as Olivia, Trivett-ed and Gale-d though she was on
the one side, yet on the other, the wife of the famous Alexis Triona and
the friend of the Olifants, folks whose genealogy was lost somewhere in
a Pictish bonfire of archives, can wander up and down the whole social
gamut at her good pleasure. Besides she herself does not mix the
incompatible. A mere question of the art of life, which Olivia, with her
London experiences found easy of resolution. So, in the mild and mellow
way on which Medlow prided itself, she had danced and tennis-ed and
picnic-ed the summer through. On the Blair Park side—she wondered
laughingly at their unsupercilious noses—Blaise Olifant and his sister
accompanied her in the gentle festivities. Each day had brought its
petty golden dust—the futile Church bazaar, the tennis tournament, the
whist-drive of which old John Freke, the linen-draper father of Lydia,
had made her a lady-patroness, the motor-run into quaint Shrewsbury, on
shopping adventure in quest of crab or lobster unobtainable in Medlow—a
thousand trivial activities—to the innocent choking of her soul, to use
Matthew Arnold’s figure, and an inevitable forgetfullness. Everything
had gone well until October. Then she had taken prudent flight with Myra
to the France and Italy which she had never seen—and there she had
stayed till the beginning of May.

It was Mrs. Woolcombe who insisted on her return to Medlow. Where else
should she return after her wanderings but to her own home? At first
everything was just as it used to be. Then, on a trivial cause—an
insult offered her by an Italian in Venice which she had laughingly
recounted—the passion of Blaise Olifant had suddenly flamed forth.

She was frightened, shaken. He had given her the thrill, which, in her
early relations with him she had half contemptuously deemed impossible.
She found herself free from sense of outrage. She bore him no
resentment. Indeed she had responded to his kiss. She was not quite
sure, within herself, whether she would not respond again. The
communicated thrill completed her original conception of him as the very
perfect gentle knight. For after all, knights without red-blood in their
veins might be gentle, but scarcely perfect.

If she were free, she would marry him out of hand, without further
question. He had always dwelt in a tender spot of her heart. Now he had
slipped into one more warm, smouldering with strange fires. But she was
not free. She stood at once at the parting of the roads. She must go
back to a wandering or lonely life, or she must defy conventions.

She went out into the ivy-walled garden, and walked up the central path,
between the beds of wallflowers and forget-me-nots and the standard
roses just bursting into leaf. What could she do? Once she had laughed
scornfully at the idea of love playing any part in her life. She had not
reckoned with her youth. And now she stared aghast at the vista of
lonely and loveless years.

Presently Blaise Olifant came from his study and advanced to meet her.

He said: “Can you speak to me now?”

“Yes—now,” she answered.

“I’ve behaved like any blackguard. You must forgive me, if you can. The
Italian cad who made me see red was not very much worse than myself.”

There was a smile in her dark eyes as she looked up at him.

“There’s all the difference in the world. I disliked the Italian very
much.” She touched his sleeve. “You are forgiven, my dear friend. It’s
all my fault. I oughtn’t to have come back.”

“You’re the most wonderful of women,” said he.

The most wonderful of women made a little wry movement of her lips.

“It’s all a might-be and a can’t-be,” she said in a low voice.

“Do you suppose, my dear, I don’t know that? If it could be, do you
think I should regret losing my self-control?”

She said. “If it’s any consolation to you—perhaps I lost mine too.
We’re both human. Perhaps a woman is even more so than a man. That’s why
I went away in October—things were getting impossible——”

“Good God!” he exclaimed, “I thought you were bored to death!”

A little laugh could not be restrained. The blindness of man to
psychological phenomena is ever a subject for woman’s sweet or bitter
mirth. But it was not in his heart to respond.

“Then you do care for me a little?”

“I shouldn’t be standing here with you now, if I didn’t. I shouldn’t
have made the mistake of coming back, if I hadn’t wanted to see you.”

“Mistake?” He sighed and turned a step away. “Yes. I suppose it was. I
should have been frank with Mary and shewn her that it was
impossible—for me.”

“It would be best for me to go to-morrow,” said Olivia.

“Where?”

“London. A hotel. Any old branch.” She smiled. “I must settle down
somewhere sooner or later. The sooner the better.”

“That’s monstrous,” he declared with a flash in his eyes. “To turn you
out of your home—I should feel a scoundrel.”

“I don’t see how we can go on living together, carrying on as usual, as
though nothing had happened.”

For a few moments they walked up the gravelled path in silence, both
bareheaded in the mild May sunshine.

“Listen,” he said, coming to a pause. “I’m a man who has learned
self-control in three hard schools—my Scotch father’s, science, war. If
I swear to you, on my honour, that nothing that has passed between us
to-day shall ever be revived by me in look or word or act—will you stay
with us, and give me your—your friendship—your companionship—your
presence in the house? It was an aching desert all the time you were
away.”

She walked on a pace or two, after a hopeless sigh. Could she never
drive into this unworldly head the fact that women were not sexless
angels? How could their eyes forever meet in the glance of a polite
couple discussing the weather across a tea-table? She could not resist a
shaft of mockery.

“For all of your philosopher father and science and war—I wonder, my
dear Blaise, how much you really know of life?”

He halted and put a hand on her slim shoulder.

“I love you so much my dear,” said he, “that I should be content to hang
crucified before you, so that my eyes could rest upon you till I died.”

He turned and strode fast away. She followed him crying “Blaise!
Blaise!” He half turned with an arresting arm—and even at that moment
she was touched by the pathos of the other empty sleeve——

“No, don’t—please.”

She ran hard and facing him blocked his way.

“But what of me? What of my feelings while I saw you hanging crucified?”

That point of view had not occurred to him. He looked at her
embarrassed. His Scottish veracity asserted itself.

“When a man’s mad in love,” said he, “he can’t think of everything.”

She took his arm and led him up the gravelled path again.

“Don’t you see, dear, how impossible it all is?”

“Yes. I suppose so. It must be one thing or the other. And all that is
good and true and honourable makes it the other.”

Tears came at the hopelessness of it. She seized his hand in both of
hers.

“What you said just now is a thing no woman could forget to the day of
her death.”

She kissed the hand and let it drop, stirred to the inmost. What was
she, ineffectual failure, to command the love of such a man? He stood
for a while looking into the vacancy of the pale blue sky over the
ivy-clad wall. Before her eyes garden and house and wall and sky were
blotted out; and only the one tall figure existed in the scene. Her
heart beat. It was a moment of peril, and the moment seemed like an
hour.

At last he turned and looked at her with his grave smile. She put her
hand on her heart not knowing whether to cry or laugh at the relaxation
of tension.

“You stay here with Mary,” he said gently. “I’ll go away for a change—a
holiday. I need one. There’s an old uncle of mine in Scotland. I’ve
neglected him and his salmon-fishing shamefully for years. How I can
fish with one arm, heaven only knows. I’ve learned to do most things.
It’ll be a new experience. As a matter of fact, I should have gone last
month, if the temptation to wait for you hadn’t been so strong. It’s up
in the wilds of Inverness——”

She made feeble protest. It was she who drove him out of his home. Far
better for her to cut herself adrift from Medlow. But he prevailed. He
would go. In the meantime things might right themselves.

He departed the following morning, leaving Olivia to a new sense of
loneliness and unrest. She lived constantly in the tense moment,
catching her breath at the significance of its possibilities. Unbidden
and hateful the question recurred: if positions had been reversed; if
Blaise had been the lost husband and Alexis the lover, would Alexis have
let her go? Certainly not Alexis. And yet deep down in her heart she was
grateful that she had come scathless through the moment.

The little round of country gaieties went on and caught her up in its
mild gyrations. Mrs. Woolcombe deplored her brother’s absence. He had
been looking forward to the social life with Olivia, especially the
tennis parties. It was wonderful how he had overcome the handicap of his
one arm; the effectual service he had perfected, tossing up the ball
with his racket and smiting it at the dead point of ascent. It had all
been due to Olivia’s encouragement the previous summer; for till then he
had not played for years. But he had been sadly overworked. When a man
cannot sleep and rises up in the morning with a band of iron round his
head, it is obvious that he needs a change. It was the best thing for
Blaise, undoubtedly; but it must be dull for Olivia. So spake Mary
Woolcombe, unaware of kisses and tense moments.

Olivia said to Myra: “This is an idle, meaningless life. We’ll go back
to London and settle down.”

“Will life mean much more when you get there?” asked Myra.

“I can do something.”

“What?”

“How do I know? Why are you so irritating, Myra?”

“It isn’t me,” said Myra.

“What is it, then?”

“A woman wants a man to look after,” said Myra in her unimpassioned way.
“If she can’t get a man she wants a woman. I’ve got you, so I’m not
irritated. You haven’t got either, so you are.”

Olivia flushed angrily and swerved round in her chair before the mirror
on her toilet-table—Myra was drying her hair—as she had dried it from
days before Olivia could remember.

“That’s a liberty, Myra, which you oughtn’t to have taken.”

“I dare say, dearie,” replied Myra unmoved, “but it’s good for you that
somebody now and then should tell you the truth.”

“I want neither man nor woman,” Olivia declared. Myra gently squared her
mistress’s shoulders to the mirror and went on with her task.

“I wonder,” she said.

“I think you’re hateful,” said Olivia.

“Maybe. But I’ve got common-sense. If you think you’re going to London
to stand for Parliament or write poetry and get it printed or run a Home
for Incurable Camels, you’re mistaken, dear. And you’ll have no truck
with women. You’ve never had a woman friend in the world—anyone you’d
die for.”

“Of course I haven’t,” snapped Olivia.

“It’s a man’s woman you are,” continued Myra. “You’ve looked after men
ever since your dear mother was taken ill. It’s what God meant you to
do. It’s all you can do. And you haven’t got a man and that’s what’s
making you unhappy.”

Olivia sprang from her chair, looking with her long black hair ruffled
and frizzed and spreading out around her warm oval face, like an angry
sea-nymph on a rock disputed by satyrs.

“I hate men and everything connected with them.”

“You still hate your husband?” asked Myra looking at her with cold pale
eyes.

“I loathe him. How dare you? Haven’t I forbidden you to mention his
name?”

“I didn’t mention his name,” said Myra. “But if you like, I won’t refer
to him again. Sit down and let me put on the electric dryer. Your hair’s
still wringing wet.” She yielded, not with good grace. Myra had her at
her mercy. Dignity counselled instant dismissal of Myra from her
presence. But the washing and drying of her long thick hair had ever
been a problem; so dignity gave way to comfort.

She was furious with Myra. We all are with people who confront us with
the naked truth about ourselves. That was all she was fit for; all that
life had taught her; to look after a man. She stared at the blatant
proposition in the grimness of the night-watches. What else, in God’s
name, was she capable of doing for an inch advancement of humanity? She
had gone forth long ago—so it seemed—from Medlow, to open the
mysterious mysteries of the world. She had opened them—and all the
pearls, good, bad and indifferent, were men. All the ideals; all the
colour and music and gorgeous edifices of life; all the world vibration
of thought and action and joy of which she had dreamed, every manifold
thrill that had run through her being from feet to hair on that first
night in London when she had leaned out of her Victoria Street flat and
opened her young soul to the informing spirit of the vast city of
mystery—the whole spiritual meaning, nay, the whole material reason for
her existence, was resolved into one exquisitely pure, bafflingly
translucent in its mystery of shooting flames, utterly elemental crystal
of sex. Sex, in its supreme purity; but sex all the same.

She was a man’s woman. It was at once a glory and a degradation. Myra
was right. What woman, in the course of her life, had she cared a scrap
for? Her mother. Her mother was a religion. And men? Her chastity
revolted. When had she sought to attract men? Her conscience was clear.
But men had been the terror, the interest, the delight of her life from
the moment she had left the cloistral walls of her home. And even before
that, on a different plane, had she not, while keeping house for father
and brothers, always thought in terms of man?

And now she was doing the same. The emptiness of her prospective life in
London appalled her. The mad liar, her husband, an unseizable, unknown
entity, of whom she thought with shivering repulsion, was away
somewhere, living a strange, unveracious life. The soldier, scholar and
gentleman, who loved her, into whose arms, into whose life, she had all
but fallen, had fled, saving her from perils. Before he returned she
must, in decency and honour, take up her solitary abode elsewhere. Or
else she could terminate his tenancy of “The Towers” and carry on an
old-maidish life in Medlow for evermore. Anyway, a useless sexless thing
for all eternity.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The second post had brought her some letters, a few bills and receipts,
a note from Janet Philimore with whom she kept up a casual
correspondence, and a long untidy screed from Lydia. Lydia had conceived
the idea of visiting Medlow. Her father, old John Freke, whom she had
not seen for years, was ailing. What did Olivia think of the notion?
Olivia, sitting in the little ivy-clad summer-house at the end of the
garden, thought less of the notion than of the amazing lady. To ask her,
an outsider, whether she should come to her father’s bed of sickness!
She made up her mind to write: “Oh, yes, come at once, but wear the
thickest of black veils, so that no one will recognize you.” Her mind
wandered away from the hypothetical visit—London and Lydia again! Just
where she was when she started. Life seemed a hopeless muddle.

“I’m sorry,” said Myra’s voice breaking suddenly on her meditations. She
looked up and beheld Myra more than usually grave and cold. “I’m sorry
to disturb you. But I’ve just had a letter. He’s dead.”

Olivia, with a shock through all her being, started to her feet.

“Dead. My husband?”

“No,” said Myra. “Mine.”

“Oh!” said Olivia somewhat breathless—and sank on the bench again. She
recovered herself quickly.

“I’m sorry, Myra. But after all, it’s a merciful release.”

“God’s mercies are inscrutable,” said Myra.

So, thought Olivia, was Myra’s remark.

“I’ve always loved him, you see,” said Myra. “I suppose you’ll have no
objections to my going to bury him?”

“My dear old Myra,” cried Olivia. “Of course, my dear, you can go—go
whenever you like.”

“I’ll come back as soon as it’s over,” said Myra.

She turned and walked away, and Olivia saw her lean and unexpressive
shoulders rise as though a sob had shaken her.


                              CHAPTER XXVI

OF the death of Myra Stebbings’s husband and of her second appearance in
Pendish during his sojourn in the West Country, Triona knew nothing.
Again she had forbidden her sister-in-law to give him any information as
to her doings. Again she disclaimed interest in the young man. Nor was
he aware, a week after the funeral, that Myra, who had stood by the
graveside in the pouring rain, and had insisted on jogging back to
Pendish wet through, in the undertaker’s brougham, lay dangerously ill
in the upstairs bedroom of the little Georgian house. The increasing
business of the Quantock Garage diverted his energies from polite tramps
into Pendish to enquire into Mrs. Pettiland’s state of health. Also, he
was growing morose, his soul feeding on itself, and beginning to develop
an unwholesome misanthropy. Like Hamlet, man didn’t delight him; no, nor
woman neither. When not working in the garage or driving the old
touring-car, he retired to brood in his loft and eschewed the company of
his kind.

“You’re overdoing it,” said Radnor, a kindly person. “Why not go away on
a holiday and have a change?”

“Only one change would do me any good,” he replied gloomily, “and that
would be to get out of this particularly vile universe.”

Radnor looked round his well ordered, bustling establishment and smiled.

“It isn’t as bad as all that.”

Triona shrugged his shoulders and spanner in hand turned to the car he
was doctoring, without a reply.

A few days afterwards Radnor said:

“We’re going to be married in August, and I don’t mind saying it’s
mostly thanks to you.”

“I’m glad to hear it,” said Triona. “I’ll stick it out till then.”

“And then?”

“I’ll have the change you’ve been talking of.”

Radnor laughed. “You’ll let me have a bit of a honeymoon first, won’t
you?”

“Oh, yes,” replied Triona. “You can have your honeymoon.”

The weakening incentive to life would last till September. He would make
it last. It was now the beginning of June. Three months or so more
wouldn’t matter. To carry on a meaningless existence further would be
absurd. Indeed, it would be immoral. Of that, for some time past he had
convinced himself.

England ran motor-mad that summer. It awoke to find war restrictions
removed, roads free and petrol to be had for the buying. In its
eagerness to race through a beloved land closed up for years and view or
review historic spots of loveliness, and otherwise to indulge in its
national vagabond humour it cared little for the price of petrol. The
hiring garages, in anything like tourist centres, found their resources
strained. Radnor bought another car, and still had more orders than he
could execute. He drove one car himself.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was a soft June evening. Triona sat at the wheel of the great
antiquated touring-car to which he had given its new lease of life,
driving homewards from the neighbourhood of the Great Junction Town. He
had taken a merry party that day some hundred and fifty miles through
the tenderest greenery of early summer, through dark gorges with
startling shadows, through cool lanes, over hills in the open sunshine;
and, in the sweetness of the evening, he had put them down at the place
whence they had started. For all his mood of despair, he had enjoyed the
day. The poet in him had responded to the eternal call of the year’s
life laughing in its gay insolence of youth. Since nine in the morning
the sweet wind of the hills had swept through his lungs and scenes of
loveliness had shimmered before his eyes.

Alone at the wheel, he thought of the passing day of beauty. Was it not
worth living—just to enjoy it? Was it not worth living—just to
translate into words, if only for the sake of the doing, the emotion of
that enjoyment? He had passed through a beech wood, a world of pale
emerald, like fairy seas, above, and a shimmer of blue-bells below as
though the sky had been laid down for a carpet. . . .

He drove slowly and carefully. The car had done its good day’s work. It
was knocking a bit, like an old horse wheezing in protest against
over-estimation of its enduring powers. He had tried it perhaps too high
to-day. He loved the re-created old car, as though it were a living
thing. A valiant old car, which had raced over awful roads in Flanders.
It was a crazy irritation that he could not pat it into comfort. Nursing
it with the mechanician’s queer tenderness, he came to the straight
mile, near home, of road on the mountain side, with its sheer drop into
the valley, ending at the turn known as Hell’s Corner, at which the
overwrought doctor, on the night of mad adventure, had lost his nerve.
Just past the corner branched the secondary road to Fanstead, for the
great road swept on by the expiring end of Pendish village; but by
walking from Pendish, as he had done on the day of the aforesaid
adventure, through lanes and fields, one cut off a great bend of road
and struck it on the fair-mile beyond the turn. And now a few hundred
yards from the corner the engine gave trouble. He descended from his
seat and opened the bonnet. He discovered a simple matter, the choking
of a plug. The knocking, he knew was in the cardan shaft. He would have
to replace the worn pin. While cleaning out the choked plug with a piece
of wire and blowing through it to clear it from the last fragment of
grit, he wondered how long it would take to have the spare pin made. He
was going out again the day after to-morrow. Could he risk the old car?
To-morrow he would take her down and see for himself the full extent of
the trouble. Meanwhile he screwed the plug on again, shut down the
bonnet, cranked up the starting handle and jumped up beside the wheel.

But just as he put in the low gear, his eyes were riveted on a familiar
figure some twenty yards away, walking towards him. For a moment or two
he remained paralysed, while the old-fashioned gears crunched horribly.
There she advanced slim, erect, in Tussore silk coat and skirt, a flash
of red bow at the opening of her blouse. The car began to move. At that
instant their eyes met. Olivia staggered back, and he read in her
bewildered gaze the same horror he had last seen in her eyes.

What she was doing here, on this strip of remote road, he could not
understand. Obviously she had not expected to find him, for she looked
at him as though he were some awful ghost. He changed gear, went full
speed ahead and passed her in a flash. Then suddenly, the command of
doom shot through his brain. This was the end. Now was the end that
should have come, had he not been a coward, months ago. He deliberately
swerved off the road and went hurtling over the hill-side.

Olivia staring, wide-eyed, wondering, at the racing car, saw it happen.
It was no accident. It was deliberate. Her brain reeled at the sudden
and awful horror. She swayed to the bank and fainted.

A two-seater car, a young man and woman in it, came upon her a few
moments later and drew up. The woman ministered to her and presently she
revived.

“There has been a horrible accident,” she explained haggardly. “A car
went over—you can see the wheel marks—Oh my God!”

She pointed. A column of smoke was rising from the valley into the still
evening air. She scrambled to unsteady feet, and started to run. The
young man detained her.

“The car will take us quicker. Maggie, you drive. I’ll stand on the
footboard.”

They swiftly covered the hundred yards or so to the scene of the
catastrophe. And there thirty feet below in the ravine the old car was
burning amid the heavy vapour of petrol smoke.

“Quick,” cried Olivia, “let us get down! He may still be alive.”

The young man shook his head. “Not much chance, poor devil.”

“Did you know him?” asked the lady.

“It was my husband,” cried Olivia tragic-eyed.

They all plunged down the slope, the young man going straight in the
ruts of the leaping car. Olivia, after a fall or two, ran gropingly to
side levels, catching hold of bushes to aid her descent, her brain too
scorched with the terror of that which lay below, for coherent thought.

Again her light, high-heeled shoes tripped her on the smooth grass and
she slithered down a few yards. And then, as she steadied herself once
more on her feet, she heard a voice from behind a clump of gorse:

“Just my damned luck!”

Her knees shook violently. She wanted to shriek, but she controlled
herself and, staggering round the gorse bush, came upon Alexis, seated
on a hummock, his head between his hands. He looked up at her stupidly;
and she, with outspread fingers on panting bosom:

“Thank God, you’re not dead.”

“I don’t know so much about that,” said he, rising to his feet.

The young woman of the car who had been following Olivia more or less in
her descent, appeared from behind the bush.

She, too, thanked God. He had been saved by a miracle. How had he
escaped?

“A providence which looks after idiots caused me to be hurled out of the
car at the first bump. I fell into the gorse. I’m not in the least bit
hurt. Please don’t worry about me.”

“You must let us drive you home—I’ll call my husband,” said the young
woman.

“Thank you very much,” said he, “but I’m perfectly sound and I’d rather
walk; but this lady seems to have had a shock and no doubt——”

The young woman, perplexed, turned to Olivia. “You said
this—gentleman—” for Alexis stood trim in brass-buttoned and legginged
chauffeur’s livery—“you said he was your husband.”

“A case of mistaken identity,” he replied suavely. Olivia, her brain in
a whirl, said nothing. The young woman advanced a few steps and coo-eed
to the young man who had just reached the ravine. As he turned on her
hail, she halloed the tidings that all was well.

“He’ll be here in a few minutes,” she said.

They stood an embarrassed trio. Alexis explained how the steering-rod,
which had given him trouble all day, had suddenly snapped. It had been
the affair of a moment. As for the car, it was merely a kind of land ark
fitted with a prehistoric internal combustion engine. Insured above its
value. The proprietor would be delighted to hear the end of it.

The young man joined them, out of breath. Explanations had to be given
_da capo_. Again Good Samaritan offers to put their two-seater at the
disposal of the derelicts. With one in the back seat they could crowd
three in front. They were going to Cullenby, twenty miles on, but a few
miles out of their way, if need be, were neither here nor there. A very
charming, solicitous, well-run young couple. Olivia scarcely knew
whether to shriek at them to go away, or to beg them to remain and
continue to save a grotesque situation.

Presently Triona repeated his thanks and declined the proffered lift.
Walking would do him all the good in the world; would steady his nerves
after his calamitous bump. The young man eyed him queerly. It was a
strange word for a chauffeur.

“But if you would take this lady,” said Triona again.

Olivia recovered her wits.

“I will walk too, if you don’t mind. I’m only a mile from home. And this
gentleman is really my husband.”

“If we can really do nothing more?” The young man raised his hat.

“A thousand thanks for all your kindness,” said Olivia.

The very mystified young couple left them and remounted the hill.

The subjects of their mystification stood for a while in silence.
Presently Olivia, whose limbs not yet recovered from the shock trembled
so that her knees seemed to give her no support, said:

“Don’t you think we might sit down for a little?”

“As you will,” said Alexis, seating himself on his hummock.

She cast herself down on the slope and closed her eyes for a moment.

“You did that on purpose,” she said at last. “You don’t suppose I
believe the story of the broken steering-rod?”

He smiled with some bitterness. Fate was for ever against him. The
moment they met in this extravagant way, there started up the barrier of
a lie.

“I couldn’t very well scare those young folks with a confession of
attempted suicide, could I? After all, the naked truth may at times be
positively indecent.”

“Then you intended to do it?”

“Oh, yes,” said he. “But it ended, like every other Great Adventure I’ve
attempted in my life, in burlesque. I assure you, that when I found
myself pitched into this clump of gorse and able to pick myself up with
nothing worse than a gasping for breath, I—well—the humiliation of
it!—I cursed the day I was born.”

“Why did you do it?” she asked.

She had scarcely regained balance. The situation seemed unreal. But a
few minutes ago he had been far from her thoughts, which were concerned
with the woman to whose possibly dying bed she had been summoned, with
the dreary days at Medlow now that Blaise Olifant had gone, with the
still beauty of the hills and their purple sunset shadows. And now, here
she was, alone with him, remote from the world, conversing as
dispassionately as though he had returned from the dead—as indeed he
had almost returned. At her question, he threw his chauffeur’s cap on
the grass and passed his hand over his hair. The familiar gesture, the
familiar nervous brown hand brought her a step nearer to reality.

“If you can’t guess, it is useless for me to tell you,” he said. “You
wouldn’t believe me.”

He took out a cigarette. She noted a trembling of the fingers.

“Do you mind?” She nodded, he lit the cigarette. “I thought here, at any
rate, I was hidden from you for the rest of my life. It wouldn’t have
been very long anyway. I had made up my mind some day soon to set you
free of me—and to-day or to-morrow—what did it matter? I don’t ask you
to believe that either. I don’t see how you can believe a word I say. I
gave you to understand, that I was in Poland—you find me here. When did
Myra tell you I was here?”

Returning sanity had corrected his first mad impression. How could she
be a mile from Pendish if she had not heard from Myra? But she regarded
him open-mouthed.

“Myra? What has Myra to do with it? Of course I had no conception you
were here? I knew you were not in Poland. A man—a Pole—I forget his
name—wrote to Major Olifant, last year, wondering what had become of
you. You had never joined him——”

“Boronowski,” said Triona.

“That was the name——”

“And you took it for granted I had lied to him too.” Her eyes dropped
beneath his half sad, half ironic gaze. She made a little despairing
gesture.

“What would you have?”

“And Myra never told you anything about me?”

“You haven’t answered my question,” she said, straightening herself:
“Where does Myra come in?”

“That’s rather a long story. I should prefer her to tell it to you. Myra
knows everything about me since the day after you received my last
letter over a year ago.”

She leaned forward, an angry spot burning on both cheeks. “Myra has been
hiding you here all the time and has told me nothing about it!”

“She has her excellent reasons. She will tell you in a very few
words——”

“She can’t. At any rate not now. She has been very ill with pneumonia.
They thought she was dying and sent for me. Why otherwise should I be
here?”

“Are you staying at Mrs. Pettiland’s?”

“Of course.”

“I didn’t even know Myra was in Pendish—I’m grieved to hear she’s ill.
I’m afraid I’ve neglected Mrs. Pettiland of late. She was very kind to
me.” He paused and added with a smile, “I see Myra’s loyalty. She
forbade Mrs. Pettiland to mention the name of the young man called
Briggs. You’ve never heard of such a person at Pendish.”

“Not a word,” said Olivia. “But I shall never forgive Myra. Never,
never,” she cried indignantly. “To fool me like that!”

He caught sudden hope from the flash in her dark eyes.

“Would you have liked to know where I was?”

“I hate duplicity. I thought that Myra, at least—my God! Is there
anybody in the world one can trust?”

Suddenly she turned on him. “What are you doing in that absurd livery?”

“I’ve been earning my living in it, since last August. I’ve done it
before. It’s an honester way than many others.”

“Forgive me, if I don’t understand,” she said, still half-bewildered.
“You have no need to earn your living by driving a car—a common
chauffeur—unless——”

She checked herself with a little gasp—but his quick brain divined her
impulsive thought.

“Unless I had taken to drink and gone to the bad, etcetera,
etcetera——”

She interrupted him quickly. “No, no. I never thought that. It was a
_reductio ad absurdum_. But on what other hypothesis——? You’ve still
your brain, your talent, your genius. Your pen——”

“Which is mightier than the wheel,” he remarked.

“I don’t know why you didn’t go to Poland. Perhaps you’ll explain.
Anyhow you didn’t. You came here—to the absolute quiet of the country.
Why haven’t you gone on writing?”

“For the simple reason,” said he, “that Alexis Triona and all his works
are dead. Washed out from the Book of Life. That side of me is all over
and done with. You who know everything, can’t you understand?”

She caught the note of truth in his words and gradually there began to
dawn on her the immensity of his artist’s sacrifice.

“Do you mean that you’re never going to write again?”

“Never,” said he. “Does this look like it?” and he touched the brass
buttons on his livery.

She weakened through impatience at his aloofness, craving to know all
that had happened to him, to get to the roots of Myra’s mysterious
intrigue. His fatalistic attitude was maddening. The whole crazy
combination of tragedy and farce that had set them down in the
gorse-enclosed hollow of the hill-side, as though they were the only
people on God’s earth, was maddening. The brass buttons were maddening.
She flung sudden arms out wide.

“For God’s sake tell me everything that has happened to you.”

“If you’ll believe it,” said he.

She sat silent for a moment, feeling as though she were under his
rebuke, and gazed over the valley at the hills black beneath the dying
green and faded orange of the sunset. The thin smoke of the burned car
mounted into the windless air faint with the smell of petrol fumes and
scorched woodwork. And Triona looked down too and saw the end of the
creation of his resurrection. He pointed to it.

“That was one of my little dreams,” he said gently. “A sort of rat trap
on wheels—the most hopeless box of antiquated imbecility you can
imagine. I took it into my head to recreate it. For a time I devoted my
soul to it—and I made it a thing of life and speed and obedience. And
there it lies dead, a column of smoke, like all dreams and, all my
deliberate fault. Every system of philosophy, since the world began, has
overlooked the ironical symbolism of life. That’s one; and my
dream—smoke.”

She fell under the spell of his voice, although her brain revolted. Yet
his note rang sincere in her heart—she knew not what to say. The sunset
colours over the ridge of hills died into iron blue of the sky. A faint
breeze stirred. She shivered with cold in her thin Tussore silk. He,
watching her, saw the shiver.

“You’re cold, you must be getting back.” He rose.

She sprang to her feet before he could help her to rise.

“I’ll see you to Mrs. Pettiland’s.”

They scrambled to the high road above them, and began to walk, in
constrained silence. Suddenly she cried:

“You’ve hurt yourself. You’re limping dreadfully. You told me you were
unhurt——” She clutched his arm. “You can’t go on like this.”

“I’ll go on like this,” said he, thrilling under her touch, “to the day
of my death. It has nothing to do with this evening’s entertainment. I
was smashed up by a motor-lorry over a year ago, as Myra will tell you.
That’s what knocked me out of Poland.”

She echoed his words—“Smashed up by a motor-lorry?—It might have
killed you—and I should have never known.”

“Myra would have told you. As a matter of fact it very nearly did kill
me.”

She turned her head away with a shudder.

“And just now——”

“I ought to have waited till I had turned the corner—” he pointed out
the bend a few yards in front of them. “Hell’s Corner, they call it
hereabouts. Then you wouldn’t have seen me go over, and I might have had
better luck.”

He saw her turn deadly white, reel, and he tried to support her; but she
slipped away from him and sat by the wayside. She thought she was going
to faint again.

“For God’s sake, don’t talk like that. It’s inhuman. It’s unlike you.
Even if you were a stranger it would be horrible.”

“I’m only apologising for my existence,” he said. “Fate has been against
me—but, believe me, I have done my best.”

After a while she rose, declaring herself better, and they struck off
the road down the twisting lane that led to Pendish. The air was
fragrant in the dusk.

“Tell me about that accident—how Myra came to know of it. I suppose you
sent her word?”

“Perhaps when you have talked to Myra, you’ll credit me at least with
sincere intentions. If I had informed her, it would have been an
indirect appeal to you.”

“Perhaps it would have been wiser to appeal to me direct,” said Olivia
tonelessly. “I’m not devoid of common humanity.”

“I couldn’t have done that,” he said gently. “I lay unconscious for
weeks. When I came to my senses I found Myra had come the second morning
I was in hospital. I had better begin with my meeting with the Pole,
Boronowski—it’s a simple matter.”

To him, walking with this lost wife of his dreams, in the lovers’ lane,
the hour seemed fantastic. His voice sounded unreal in his ears. His
heart lying heavy as lead within him was not the heart that he had
thought would beat furiously at the ravishing sight of her. He told his
story badly; just the salient facts, uninspired by the dramatic instinct
which had made him colour so vividly the narration, a year ago, to Mrs.
Pettiland, of his ridiculous adventure. This he barely sketched. For
truth’s sake he must tell her of the robbery and account for his
penniless condition. It was not himself talking. It was not Olivia to
whom he talked. One stranger’s personality was talking through him to
another’s. At the end of the tale:

“You have changed greatly,” she said.

“That’s very possible.” There was a pause. He continued. “And you?
Forgive me. I haven’t even asked whether you are well——”

“Oh, I’ve been all right. I spent the winter abroad, and now I’m staying
with Mrs. Woolcombe at ‘The Towers.’ Major Olifant is away.”

They came up suddenly against the wicket-gate of Mrs. Pettiland’s
garden. A light shone through the yet undrawn curtains in his old
bedroom. He raised an enquiring hand.

“Myra?”

“Yes. I’m in Mrs. Pettiland’s room in the front. She would give it up to
me. I’ve been helping to nurse—as well as I can. I’ve been in all day.
That’s why I came out for a walk this evening.”

“You must be tired.”

“I am.”

He waited, hoping against hope, for a word revoking his sentence. None
came. The steel sinew that ran through him, and was answerable for all
his accomplishment, stiffened. He would make no appeal _ad
misericordiam_. He had suffered enough in expiation. He had come to the
end of his tether. For pity masking the last year’s hatred and contempt
he had no use. He opened the gate for her. She passed in and he closed
it and the click of the latch sounded like the crack of finality; for
Olivia, taken almost unawares, as for Triona. They stood for a while,
the wooden barrier between them, in the gathering darkness.

Impulsively she exclaimed: “We can’t part like this, with a thousand
things unexplained.”

“I’m at your orders, Olivia,” he replied.

She caught her breath and stiffened. “We must talk to-morrow—when we
have both recovered.”

“I’ll be here any hour you name,” said Alexis. Radnor and his garage
could go to the devil.

“Nine o’clock?”

“Nine o’clock,” said he. “Good night, Olivia.”

“Wait.”

The memory of the scandal crashed down on her. . . .

“I may as well tell you now—the night may bring counsel—I’m in a
terrible position. Wedderburn and Onslow—you remember?”

“I do,” he said.

She told him rapidly of her pledge.

“It doesn’t matter a scrap to me, but it’s a damnable thing for you,”
said he.

“What answer would you make?”

“A clean breast of everything. Could you wish me to do anything else?”

“I don’t know,” she replied. “Give me time to think.”

“My time is yours, Olivia.”

She paused for a moment irresolute. There was a question she wished to
put, but the thought of it made her feel sick and faint again.

“You’ll not do anything foolish, till I see you?”

“Nor anything wise,” said he. “I promise.”

Again there came between them a long embarrassed silence. At last——

“Good night,” she said.

“Good night, Olivia.”

She flung an angry hand in the darkness and slipped away into the house.


                             CHAPTER XXVII

MRS. PETTILAND met her at the foot of the stairs. She beamed rosily
beneath the gas jet.

“Myra is so much better, Madam, after her sleep. The doctor came while
you were out. I’m to make her some chicken broth.”

Olivia mounted the stairs and entered the sick-room.

“Well dearie?”

She turned to the gaunt waxen face on the pillow.

“I’m so glad to hear the doctor’s good report.”

She forced herself to linger, speaking the commonplaces of the
sick-room. Then she could bear it no longer.

“I’m dead tired,” she said. “I’ll go to bed. Nurse ought to be here
soon. Have you everything you want for the night?”

Myra said in her even tones: “Have _you_ everything you want for the
night?” And at Olivia’s quick glance of enquiry: “You look as if you’d
seen a ghost. You have. I was afraid of it. I didn’t want them to send
for you, but I was too ill to stop them.”

Olivia could not wreak her anger yet on the frail woman. But in her
heart burned a furious indignation. She controlled her voice, and said
as gently as she could:

“Why have you left me in ignorance for the past year?”

“I was biding my time,” said Myra. “I was waiting for a sign and a
token.”

“From me?”

“From you, dearie. I had him here in the hollow of my hand. If you had
wanted him, I could have given him to you. But you didn’t want him—so
you said. I wasn’t so sure.” She stretched her thin hand on the blanket,
but Olivia stood, too much enwrapped in her thoughts to notice the
appeal. “When I first saw him in hospital I hoped that he would die and
set you free. But when I saw him convalescent, my heart was full of pity
for him, and I repented of the sin of committing murder in my heart. And
when I heard from my sister in-law that he was facing life like a brave
man, I wondered whether I had been wrong and whether you had been wrong.
If I say something to you, will you be angry with me?”

Olivia shrugged her shoulders. “Say anything you like.”

The weak, even voice went on. “If Major Olifant hadn’t left us, I should
have told you.”

Olivia leaped at the thrust, her cheeks flaming.

“Myra! How dare you?”

The thin lips parted in a half smile.

“Have you ever known me not to dare anything for your good?”

Myra, with all the privileges of illness, had her at a disadvantage.
Olivia was silenced. She unpinned her hat and threw it on a chair and
sat by the bedside.

“I see that you acted for the best, Myra.”

Not only her cheeks, but her body flamed at what seemed now the
humiliating allusion. Myra was fully aware, if not of the actual
kiss—oh, no—nothing horrible of servant’s espionage in Myra—at any
rate of the emotionality in which it had culminated—on her part sex,
sense, the unexpected thrill, the elemental between man and woman, the
hunger for she knew not what—but superficial, tearing at her nerves,
but never, oh, never touching the bed-rock of her spiritual being. A
great passionate love for Blaise, she knew, Myra with her direct vision,
would have understood. For the assurance of her life’s happiness Myra
would have sacrificed her hope of eternal salvation.

But the worn woman who had had but one’s week’s great fulfilment of love
in her life, knew what love meant, and she had sounded the shallows of
her pitiful love—if love it could be called—for Blaise Olifant; and
now, in her sad, fatalistic way she shewed her the poor markings of the
lead.

“So you have seen him?” asked Myra quietly.

“Yes I’ve seen him. God knows how you know.”

“Well?”

Her overstrained soul gave way. She broke into uncontrollable crying and
sobbing, her little dark head on the blanket by Myra’s side. And after a
little came incoherent words.

“I’ve lost him—He doesn’t care for me any more—He hates me—He tried
to kill himself when he saw me—He was driving a car and put it over a
precipice—Thank God—a miracle—he wasn’t hurt—But he might have
killed himself—He meant to—And it’s all your fault—all your fault—If
only you had told me. . . .”

Myra put her thin hand on the dear dark hair and caressed it till the
paroxysm was over.

“I loved a thing that was scarcely a man till the day of his death, for
I had memories, dearie, of him when he was a man to be loved. You’ve got
a living man for a husband. And you loved yours as much as I loved mine.
And he’s a living and suffering man. Go to him—” her hand still played
feebly caressing the black mass of her hair. “Fate has brought you
together again. He’s your man, whom you vowed to help in sickness or in
health. I kept mine in sickness. Thank God, your man’s sickness is
nothing like mine. Go to him, dearie. Humble yourself if need be . . .
I’ve been very ill. I’ve thought and thought and thought—I’ve an idea
that illness clears one’s brain—and all my thoughts have been for you.
For me there’s nothing left. I’ve thought of him and you. I’ve thought
of what he has done and what you have done—And, with all his faults,
he’s a bigger human being than you are, dearie. Go to him.”

Olivia raised a tragic face.

“How can I? He doesn’t want me.”

“A man doesn’t try to kill himself for a woman he doesn’t want. You had
better go to him.”

And Olivia went. She slipped out of the house at eleven o’clock, after a
couple of hours of wrestling with ugly and vain devils. Who was she,
after all? What had she done to add a grain to the world’s achievement?
What had she found in her adventure into the world that had been worth
the having save the love of the man that was her husband? Many phases of
existence had passed procession-wise through her life. All hollows and
shams. The Lydian galley, with its Mavennas and Bobby Quintons. The mad
Blenkirons. The gentle uninspiring circle of little Janet Philimore. The
literary and artistic society for the few months of Alexis’s
lionization—pleasant, but superficial, always leaving her with the
sense of having fallen far short of a communion that might have been.
Nothing satisfying but the needs and the childish wants and the work and
the uplifting spirit of the one man. And after the great parting what
had there been? Her life in Medlow devoid of all meaning—Her six months
travel—a feeding of self to no purpose. An existence of negativity.
Blaise Olifant. She flamed, conscious of one thing at last positive, and
positive for ill. She had played almost deliberately with fire.
Otherwise why had she gone back to Medlow? She had brought unhappiness
to a very noble gentleman. It had been in his power, as a man, to sweep
her off her feet in a weak hour of clamouring sex. He had spared
her—and she now was unutterably grateful. For she had never loved him.
She could not love him. His long straight nose. She grew half
hysterical. Even when he had kissed her she had been conscious of that
long straight nose. She withered at the thought.

She slipped out of the house into the soft night. Pendish, with its
double line of low, whitewashed, thatched cottages, one a deep shadow,
the other clear in the moonlight, lay as still as a ghostly village of
the middle ages. The echo of her light footsteps frightened her. Surely
windows would fly open and heads peer out challenging the disturber of
peace.

She was going to him. Why, she scarcely knew. Perhaps through obedience
to Myra. Myra’s bloodless lips, working in the waxen, immobile face lit,
if dull glimmer could be called light, by the cold china blue eyes, had
uttered words little less than oracular. Myra had been waiting for a
sign or a token from her that had never come. She walked through the
splendid silence of the country road, beneath the radiance of a moon
above the hills illuminating a mystery of upland and vale shrouded in
the vaporous garments of the land asleep. Hurrying along the white
ribbon of road she was but a little dark dot on the surface of a
serenely scornful universe.

She was going to him. He was her man. All that she knew of the meaning
of existence came from him. Moonlight and starlight and the mystery of
the night shimmering through its veil of enchantment faded from her
eyes. She felt nervous arms around her and kisses on her lips, and she
heard him speaking the winged words of imagination, lifting her into his
world of genius.

“A man doesn’t try to kill himself for a woman he doesn’t want.”

So spake Myra. Olivia walked, the dull tones in which the words were
uttered thudding in her ears. It was her one hope of salvation. Kill
himself! This was not a falsehood. She had seen the act with her own
horror-stricken eyes. She remembered a phrase of Blaise Olifant’s: “He
is being blackmailed by one lie.”

She realized, with sudden shock, her insignificant loneliness in the
midst of this vast moonlit silence of the earth. In presence of the
immensities she was of no account. For the first time she became aware
of her own failure. She had been weighed in the balance of her love for
her husband and had been found wanting. In the hour of his bitter trial,
she had failed him. In the hour when a word of love, of understanding,
which meant forgiveness, would have saved him, she had put him from her.
She had lived on her own little vanities without thought of the man’s
torture. She had failed him then. She had failed him to-day.

“A man doesn’t try to kill himself for a woman he doesn’t want.”

She strode on, her cheeks burning. All that of extravagance which he had
done this past year had been for her sake. For all wrong he had done
her, he had sought the final expiation in death. She had failed him
again in this supreme crisis. She had whined to Myra that he no longer
loved her. And she had not given him—that which even Myra was waiting
for—a sign and a token.

She was going to him, nearing him. Already she entered the straggling
end of Fanstead. How would he receive her? If he cast her off, she would
perish in self-contempt. She went on. An unsuspecting Mrs. Pettiland had
told her, in answer to a question which she strove to keep casual, the
whereabouts of the Quantock Garage. The sign above an open gateway broke
suddenly on her vision. She entered a silent courtyard. A light was
burning in a loft above a closed garage, and a wooden flight of steps
ran up to it. The door was open and on the threshold sat a man, his feet
on the top stair, his head buried in his hands. She advanced, her heart
in her mouth.

The moon shone full on him. She uttered a little whispering cry:

“Alexis!”

He started to his feet, gazed at her for a breathless second and
scrambled with grotesque speed down the rickety staircase and caught her
in his arms.

                 *        *        *        *        *

She mounted the stairs to his loft, furnished with pallet bed and camp
washing apparatus, a wooden chair, a table bearing unsightly remains of
crust and cheese, and littered with books in corners and on the
uncarpeted floor. All her remorse and pity and love gushed over
him—over the misery of the life to which she had condemned him by her
littleness of soul and her hardness of heart. She did not spare herself;
but of this profanity he would hear nothing. She had come to him. She
had forgiven him. The Celestial Hierarchy would be darkened by the
presence of one so radiantly angelic.

She clutched him tight to her. “Oh, my God, if you had been killed!”

Exultant, he cried in his old way: “Nothing could kill me, for I was
born for your love.”

They talked through the night into the sweet-scented June dawn. They
would face the world fearlessly together. First the Onslow and
Wedderburn challenge to be taken up. She would stand by his side through
all the obloquy. That was the newer meaning of her life. If they were
outcasts what did it matter? They could not be other than splendidly
outcast. He responded in his eager way to her enthusiasm. _Magna est
veritas et prævalebit._ With never a shadow between them, what ecstasy
would be existence.

They crept downstairs like children into the summer morning.

                 *        *        *        *        *

But as they had planned so did it not turn out. Rowington gave news that
Onslow and Wedderburn had dropped the question. Why revive dead
controversy? But Triona and Olivia insisted. The letter on the origin of
_Through Blood and Snow_, signed “John Briggs” appeared in _The Times_.
A few references to it appeared in the next weekly Press. But that was
all. No one was interested. _Through Blood and Snow_ was forgotten. The
events of 1917 in Russia were ancient history. As well worry over fresh
scandals concerning Catherine the Great. What did the reading world care
what Alexis Triona’s real name was, or how he had obtained the material
for his brilliant book?

This summary of the effect of attempted literary and social suicide was
put clearly before them in a long letter from Rowington a month or so
afterwards.

“But we want another novel from Alexis Triona. When are we going to get
it?”

They had stayed on indefinitely at Pendish, ostensibly awaiting Myra’s
complete convalescence, and incidentally, as they told themselves,
having their second honeymoon. At first she took it for granted that he
would resign his post at the Quantock Garage.

“I’m not going to begin life again by breaking my word,” said he. “I
promised to see him over his honeymoon.”

“That’s a bit mad and Quixotic,” said Olivia.

“So’s all that’s worth having in life, my dear,” said he.

So she had settled down for the time with her chauffeur husband, and
meanwhile had been feeding him into health.

They read the letter together.

“It’s no use,” wrote Rowington, “to start again under the Briggs name.
You’ve told the world that Triona is a pseudonym. Alexis Triona means
something. John Briggs doesn’t.”

“He’s quite right,” said Olivia.

“As you will,” he said. “I give in. But you can’t say I’ve not done my
very best to kill Alexis Triona.”

“And you can’t. Fate again. And—Alexis dear—I never knew John Briggs.”

They were in the sea-haunted parlour. After a while he took up the pink
conch-shell and fingered it lovingly. Then, with a laugh, he put it to
her ear.

“What does it say?”

She listened a while, handed him back the shell and looking up at him
out of her dark eyes, laughed the laugh of deep happiness.

“I’ll go with you, dear—to any South Sea Island you like.”

“Will you?” he cried. “We’ll go. And I’ll write a novel full of the
beauty of God’s Universe and you.”

Myra came in to lay the luncheon table. Olivia leaped up and threw her
arms around the thin shoulders.

“Myra dear, you’ll have to pack up quick. We’re going to Honolulu
to-morrow.”

“You must make it the day after,” said Myra. “The laundry doesn’t come
till to-morrow night.”

                                THE END

                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected. Inserted word
marked with square bracket around insertion. Where multiple spellings
occur, majority use has been employed.

Punctuation has been maintained except where obvious printer errors
occur.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tale of Triona, by William J. Locke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF TRIONA ***

***** This file should be named 60122-0.txt or 60122-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/1/2/60122/

Produced by Marcia Brooks, Al Haines, Jen Haines & the
online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

